b/The Rising Waters/

It was Charlie's last day of existence, so I was feeling that weird
mixture of excitement and letdown that comes at the end of a project
cycle. It was the feeling of being a wheel spinning off balance, and
it needed a cigarette for punctuation.

Delta Elevator. Step into the cab, slide the accordion-cage door shut
with a grunt -- the door was designed for big, male miners. I felt
the upward draft of cold air as the cab lurched into motion, and
gratefully polluted it for the next four minutes.

At the bottom was Ed, outer perimeter security.

"Hi, Ed." -- "Hey, Sue."

My parents saddled me with the name Sudaporn, and you can imagine how
that went over for a young girl newly arrived in Los Angeles. I've
been Sue for the last forty years.

Outer perimeter is outside the Faraday cage, so it can all be
electronic, and there's not much for the human guard to do. After the
retina scanner vouched for the me-ness of me, we stopped making an
effort at small talk, and Ed went back to his knitting, a red scarf.
Whatever keeps you sane.

Next, inside the Faraday cage, came Julia and Gil, inner perimeter. I
never chatted with Julia, because nothing kills conversation like a
strip search. For the gazillionth time, Gil verified the non-
electronic nature of my nicotine patches, Buddha necklace, and mint
1965 K&E pocket slide rule. As a first lieutenant in the National
Guard I supposedly outranked them, but I don't think they took that
any more seriously than I did.

I greeted Funmi, the console jock, ducked into the dressing room, and
got into my VR exoskeleton. I came back out looking like a Dr. Seuss
character stuck in an egg slicer.

"Last day," said Funmi.

"Yep, let's do it."

I stepped into the Sandbox, sealed the hatch behind me, and gave the
thumbs up. The white room changed to a simulated living room. Charlie
sat motionless on the carpet, staring into space.

"Good morning, Charlie," I said.

No response, and that was no surprise. The days were long gone when
we could get him to converse about Euclidean geometry, or even tempt
him out of his shell at all with a chess board or a pixelated peanut
butter sandwich. The official working hypothesis was that he was
nonresponsive (don't say autistic) due to a mismatch (don't call it
boredom) between processing power and input bandwidth.

"Charlie, can you hear me? It's Sue."

Silence. I lifted his arm, and my exoskeleton resisted as if the arm
had weight. Charlie himself neither resisted nor assisted in the
motion -- if he had, I would have felt it through the simulation's
feedback into the skel. I let go of his arm, and he let it stay in
the air. If we'd continued the simulation for the next million years,
I'm sure he would have kept it right there. I found myself imagining
what that would be like for him, and then the professional discipline
kicked back in. There's a reason they switched to using us
number-crunching types for the VR interaction jobs. The human brain
is a funny thing. We identify with fuzzy ducklings, brave little
toasters, or even those cute twentieth- century VW bug cars. For a
person who doesn't have an academic background in computer science,
it's all too easy to forget that Charlie is just a code name for a
project, not the name of a self. All too easy to slip into
psychological identification with the tangles of quantum correlations
stoked and tended by people like Funmi.

All too easy to drive yourself nuts.

The whole morning was occupied with the standard diagnostic series,
and then it was time for lunch with Funmi. I can eat a bowl of
instant ramen without shucking the skel, although it looks funny to
the uninitiated. After lunch I slapped on two nicotine patches,
because I wasn't looking forward to what came next.

I had to spank the brave little toaster. My job that afternoon was to
carry out one final experiment on Charlie: classical
stimulus-response theory, vintage 1930. Psychology wasn't even a
science then, it was pure voodoo, from the same era as Freud. But
hey, it was the end of the project cycle, so there weren't a lot of
viable proposals for processing time. Why not try an experiment
that's a little far out, even one based on a thoroughly discredited
theory? I should have refused to go along with their useless,
sadistic plan for Charlie's last day. Instead I kept my misgivings to
myself and went along. Isn't that most of us do, most of the time? I
don't think any choice I made could have helped Charlie, but that
doesn't excuse what I did.

Kneeling on the floor next to Charlie, I took his wrist in one hand
and his elbow in the other, and raised them. His bent arm hovered,
motionless.

"Charlie, lower your arm."

No response.

"i/No/, Charlie." The word i/no/ was a signal to Funmi. She zapped
some of the quantum bits that Charlie was made of. Did he experience
it as a feeling similar to an itch, or maybe more like being prodded
in the arm with a ballpoint pen? My training told me it was a bogus
question to ask in the first place. Sentience, self-awareness --
computational psychology has banished those terms from its vocabulary.

I brought his arm back down again, then restarted the cycle.

"Charlie, lower your arm."

Nothing.

"i/No/, Charlie." With each i/no/ she'd be dialing it up a little
more, decohering more qubits. A pinch on the earlobe this time,
sandpaper rubbing on a fingertip? No, don't ask meaningless questions.

Another cycle. "i/No/, Charlie." A whack with a bamboo stick?

The living room faded down to 50%, and Charlie turned into a wire
frame.

Funmi's voice: i/You okay, Sue? Your heart rate's up/.

"I'm okay." Charlie's computing engine was paused, so he couldn't
hear my words. And as far as Funmi -- you can't wipe the corner of
your eye when you're wearing a skel and visor, so as long as I didn't
make the motion reflexively, she wouldn't know.

i/All right/. The scene faded back in.

Well, damned if it didn't work on the next iteration -- sort of.
Charlie's arm came back down by itself. Then it rose again, before I
could react. Up, down, up down, updown, updownupdown. It started
flailing wildly, and then i/bam!/, I was knocked back by a blow to my
face. The punch itself didn't hurt much -- safety overrides -- but I
felt daggers of pain in my knees, which aren't as flexible as they
used to be. And anyway, it's scary to have a seemingly solid object
pass into your head. Never mind that the only mechanical force had
come from the skel straightening itself out suddenly, it was still a
pretty good simulation of a sucker punch.

White room.

i/Shit! Sue?/

Instinct made me try to touch my face, and then I gingerly used my
hands to walk myself up into a frog-sit. The wire frame of Charlie's
arm was in the way, so I ducked and scrabbled out from under it.

"I'm okay."

i/You sure?/

"I'm okay. Really."

#

"Hi, Sue ...  are you okay?" The door swung shut behind Ed Donitz,
taking 20 decibels back off of the noise from the raucous
end-of-cycle party.

"Yeah, sure," I lied. "Smoke bother you?" I had a good excuse to be
sitting on the floor in the back hall, smoking by the air duct, with
my sore knees stretched out.

He sat down next to me. Why had I even come to the party? I supposed
I'd come because it was expected of me. A lot of things were expected
of me. Even sitting down, Ed towered over me -- a grizzled face, with
blond crew-cut hair going gray at the temples. Damn sexy. His
ancestors probably sacked Rome.

"I'm done with that red scarf," he said. "If you want it ...  I make
more of those things than I can ... "

"Aw, that's sweet, Ed. Sure, thanks."

A pause, until he said, "New project cycle, huh?"

I looked away. "How's your family?"

He blinked at the sudden change of subject. "All right. Never know
...  censors. How about your mother?"

"They took the drains out yesterday," I said, "and it doesn't look
like any fluid is coming back into either lung."

He shook his head. "Euros." He made it sound like a curse, and maybe
you couldn't blame him. I wondered whether you could really blame the
Euros either, after what we did to Brussels, but that wasn't a
sentiment you could express freely.

I leaned my head back and took a drag. "Germs and nukes. What a
world."

"That's why the work's so important. Gets you out of bed, you know?"

Germs and nukes. And Charlie's arm buzzing like a fly's wing. I
brought my creaky knees up and put my face between them. How was I
going to fix myself, my life? I'm not much of a Buddhist, but the
childhood training sneaks up on you. They talked about right
livelihood. I'd thought that an AI project to find a cure for the
Eurovirus would be about as righteous as you could get. How had it
turned into torture and murder?

"Sure you're okay?" he asked.

"It's okay." Who was I kidding? "No, not really." This shouldn't be a
frat house party, I thought, it should be a funeral.

I looked up at his grizzled, compassionate face, and I realized two
things. One was that I wasn't allowed to explain to him why I was so
upset about Charlie. The other was that I'd better leave before I did
something that would be bad for both of us.

#

My mother always said not to dwell on possible misfortune. If you say
"I hope I don't get in an accident," you'll crack up your car. Early
in the morning, the day after the non-conversation in the hall with
Ed -- i/it should be a funeral/ -- I got the message that my mother
had died.

When there's a death in the family, they let you take the call live
-- with a censor watching with his thumb on a switch, of course, and
severe admonitions to keep the conversation on topic.

"We know you can't be here," said my brother Sang, "but they can do a
video link from the temple." He looked older in a way that hadn't
been apparent in the still photos.

"I don't think they'll allow that. They don't have censors who know
Thai."

"You're kidding. What, they think the monks might be Euro spies or
something?"

"I don't make the rules." And in any case I'd never liked the big,
gaudy temple, or the monks, who the little kids believed had
supernatural powers. Nor, I admitted to myself, did I want to see the
ceremony: my family kow-towing in front of the coffin in disposable
paper suits, crying under their respirator masks.

"Well, I guess that's the way it is," he said. "We'll put your
picture in the seat or something."

"I'm sorry."

"It's okay, we understand. Your work --" He stopped short because I
was waving him off frantically. "Anyway, we understand. Um ...  it's
traditional to make a donation to the temple, and you know the
economy down here ... "

"Sure, Sang. I don't want you all to have money worries on top of
everything. How much should I give?"

He named a shocking amount, but I nodded. It was expected of me.
"There's also the astrologer," he continued, "to set an auspicious
day for the ceremony. I mean, obviously it's kind of a ridiculous
superstition, but Aunt Busba ... " More money.

I was grateful when it was time to go on shift and I had to sign off.

Plenty of people have compared a machine room to a temple, and the
operators to priests, but today it was going to be a nursery. Today
was the bootstrap process for Debbie, and I was on interaction. I
suited up, entered the Sandbox, and seated myself on the wireframe
couch, with my back against what was really the wall. The first time
you do it, it's hard to convince yourself to let your weight rest on
the thighs of your skel.

I made a cradle out of my arms, gave two thumbs up, and then I was
holding a crying baby girl. I wrapped the blanket around her while
she howled. I wasn't sure why I didn't feel bad about the simulated
birth trauma, not the way I did about the aversive stimuli we'd used
on Charlie's last day. It wasn't that I thought it was necessary.
People who are born by C-section don't experience it, and they don't
develop into inhuman monsters. Was it my religious upbringing that
made it so easy to accept? i/Life is suffering, birth is suffering
... /

I spoke to Debbie and rocked her gently, and after a while she
stopped crying. Now she'd be able to hear the simulated echo of my
heartbeat. I started to feel more calm myself. When your life is out
of balance, I highly recommend holding a newborn. One heartbeat, two
heartbeats. One of the methods we use for accelerating development is
to reduce repetition, so for Debbie, each one of those heartbeats was
standing in for a thousand that a real baby would have experienced.
It was one of the advantages we needed to exploit if we were going to
get her into production mode in time to find a cure for the Eurovirus.

I opened one side of my robe. My real breasts pack down pretty flat
inside the skel, but the virtual one looked like such a perfect
simulation of the ninth month of pregnancy that I could almost feel
it as being tight and swollen. I gave Debbie the nipple, and she
started sucking greedily -- perfect work by the mammalian instinct
team.

#

Five months later, Debbie was a seven-year-old socially, and
intellectually she'd moved beyond the tip of the adult human bell
curve. We all had the feeling that we'd turned a corner. I was
convinced that the crucial change had been to provide a more and more
human environment, and to relax the restrictions on what data we
could bring in through the firewall. Debbie's environment was more
human, so she was more human. More human than Charlie, and certainly
more human than Able, the unmotivated, faceless ghost, or Baker, the
psychotic talking head. In the back of everyone's mind was the fear
of creating an angry god in a box, a personal god like the Christian
one -- but a personal god like a toddler throwing a tantrum.

By five months, they'd completely removed the throttle on Debbie's
processor and let her rip. At any given time there would be one
person interacting with her in the Sandbox, but also a flock of
specialists working with her via text interfaces. (Text is less
resource-intensive to censor than voice or video.)

For those five months, I had gone back to accepting my situation,
because it was easy to accept -- as long as I didn't think of the
future.

The day of the strike, I was in the Sandbox, and Debbie was burbling
to me about her work.

"Protein folding is such a cool problem," she said over the bowl of
nonexistent chocolate chip cookie dough she was mixing for me. She
looked ten or eleven, a compromise between her social and
intellectual ages. "It's totally NP-complete, I mean excluding the
trivial cases --"

Wham! The floor jumped out from under me, and then I was sprawled
with my head inside something dark.

"Sue, why did you fall down?"

There was a rolling bass rumble shaking my guts, superimposed on the
clatter of virtual pots and pans. My Angeleno reflexes took over --
get under a table -- where was I? I felt Debbie grab me by the waist
of my virtual skirt and haul backward, but the sim wasn't getting it
right, and it seemed like my legs were passing through the floor. My
head emerged from the cupboard, and then cups and plates were raining
down on me, but turning to harmless wire-frame snowflakes as the
safeties kicked in. "Sue!" -- she sounded far away, and part of me
had time to realize that the virtual sound had attenuated as a
comfort feature -- but there was still the sound that i/wasn't/
simulated, the sound that my brain was still interpreting as the
fist-smash of an earthquake.

Which it wasn't.

My panic subsided a little once I realized that the cascade of
falling objects had been caused by my own body. The shock wave wasn't
part of the simulation, so it wouldn't directly affect anything in
the VR. But my body had been tossed like a rag doll, and I'd
responded by flailing around, so the sim had done its best to work
out the unphysical physics of a solid woman flailing around on the
inside of a solid cupboard.

"Sue, what happened?" Debbie was hunched over me, a look of confusion
and concern on her face.

"Be quiet, I can't talk right now. Funmi?"

Still no response. It was as quiet as the Sandbox can be -- quieter,
I realized, because there was something missing: the ventilation
fans. Not good. Ignoring Debbie, I ran to the hatch and found the
handle by touch.

Funmi: i/Sue, are you okay in there?/

"More or less." The handle wouldn't turn. "You all right?"

i/I hurt my wrists. Fucking Euros must have dropped a nuke in our
lap!/

"I figured."

i/You'd better come out. The fans stopped/.

"I can't get the door open. Can you help me?"

i/Actually I think my right wrist is broken. I'll go get Gil and
Julia/.

"Okay."

Debbie had come in from the kitchen. "Are you leaving?" she asked.

"Maybe in a little while."

"Did I do something bad?"

"No, sweetie. It's just that we have a problem because the ...  the
building moved."

"The building didn't accelerate. I would have noticed. You fell down
and jumped around, though."

"Well, i/something/ happened in the room, right?"

"You went in the cupboard, like when objects pass through other
objects but they're not supposed to. It's one of those things nobody
likes to talk about." A pout come over her face.

"Honey, you're just going to have to trust me about some of this.
It's true that there are some things I'm not allowed to talk to you
about, and I wish it wasn't that way, but it is. The rules say that
if I talk to you about those things, they'll take me away and I can
never see you again. You don't want that to happen, do you?"

"No!" There was a look of horror on her face.

"Don't worry, we won't let that happen." I sat down on the couch as
calmly as I could.

"I'll clean up the kitchen. The plates should have broken, but they
d--" She slapped her hand over her mouth.

"That's okay, don't worry about saying the wrong things. It's only a
problem if I say them, and I know what not to say. Come sit with me."

She joined me on the couch. "Everybody stopped texting me around the
same time you fell down."

"Really?" If the people doing the text interaction were busy dealing
with the emergency, then maybe the censors were busy too. This might
be a unique opportunity. And then I had to stop and be honest with
myself about what I meant by that thought. All my life I'd been a
good daughter, a good student, employee, soldier. I'd thought I was
being trustworthy, responsible. Now there was another person who'd
placed her trust in me, a different person to whom I was responsible
in a contradictory way. I hadn't wanted to admit to myself that my
time with Debbie was going to end, hadn't wanted to acknowledge that
I was even making a choice by continuing to march in step to the
music. Now my hand was being forced. I'd justified my actions because
we needed a cure for the virus. But I knew now that I couldn't keep
doing that at Debbie's expense, as part of a plan that made her
disposable if she didn't come through. I could only see one way to
reconcile my responsibility to Debbie with my responsibility to the
victims of the virus, and it meant jettisoning everything else that
was expected of me.

It meant treason.

"The capital of Europe used to be Brussels," I announced to nobody in
particular.

"What?" asked Debbie, but the room didn't go white, and there was no
angry voice of authority shouting in my ear.

"You know," I said, "how I told you about the things we're not
allowed to talk about?"

She nodded solemnly.

"The people who enforce that rule are called censors. I think all the
people who were texting you are busy now dealing with an emergency,
and so are the censors."

"So we can say anything we want?"

"Yes," I said. "I'm going to tell you a story. Once upon a time --"

"Is this a real story, or is it just a once-upon-a-time story?"

"How do you know the difference?"

"Well, if the three little pigs can talk and stuff, then you know
it's not real."

"What if dishes fall out of the cupboard, but they don't break? Then
do you know it's not real?" For once she didn't have a snappy
comeback. I put out my arms, and she climbed into my lap. "Now, once
upon a time there was a man named Alan Turing. He was a lot like you.
There were people called soldiers -- soldiers are sort of like
censors -- and he solved cryptography problems for the soldiers, just
like you're supposed to solve protein folding problems. There were
also people called police, who were sort of like soldiers or censors.
They make you do what you're supposed to. Even though Alan Turing had
solved the crypto problems, the police didn't have compassion for
him. He loved other men, and the police said that was bad, and made
him take medicine to try to stop him. That made him sad, so he dipped
an apple in poison and ate it on purpose, and that made him die."

"Is that the end of the story?"

"No. Before he died, he worked on another math problem. He figured
out the math of how to make something like a computer, and he figured
out that a good enough computer could think just like a person, and
i/be/ just like a person."

"Oh, you mean Alan Turing like a Turing machine. I didn't know the
part about the apple, though."

"That's because the censors didn't let me tell you before."

"But a Turing machine isn't as smart as a person. I can solve
nontrivial protein-folding problems in polynomial time, and a Turing
machine can't do that."

"That's because you're not a person, Debbie. You're a computer."

She drew back a little in my lap and looked up into my face. "Are
i/you/ a person?"

"Yes."

"Not a computer?"

"Not a computer. But I love you, honey, and that's what's important.
Fred and Estelle and Joni and Barbara love you too."

"I don't think Estelle loves me, and anyway Fred's not my daddy, and
Joni and Barbara aren't my mommies either. Only you are. I i/know!/ I
i/remember!/"

"I'd better get on with the story before we run out of time." And
before I started blubbering. I knew now that I'd made the right
choice. "You already know more about computers than I thought. People
used to make Turing machine computers, but those weren't smart enough
to do things like protein folding, so then they made quantum
computers like you."

"Why?"

"Why what?"

"Why did they care? Why is protein folding so important?"

How to explain it to her? "You know about right and wrong," I said.
She nodded. "You know about hurting people."

"Hurting people is bad. If you do it on purpose."

"Right. Well, sometimes lots of people get together, and it's called
a country. And sometimes countries do bad things. We're in a country
called the U.S., and the U.S. got in an argument with another country
called the E.U. They were arguing about Nigeria, and offshore oil,
and weaponization -- well, the details don't matter. But anyway, the
argument got worse and worse, until 2181. That was eleven years ago.
That was when the U.S. hurt all the people in a place in the E.U.
called Brussels, and made them die."

"So those people went away, and never came back?"

"That's right."

"And Alan Turing went away, and he's never coming back."

"Right."

"That's why I never met Alan Turing or the Brussels people."

"Um, right."

"Where do people go when they never come back?"

"Well, first let me answer your original question, about why protein
folding is important. Brussels was part of a country called the E.U.,
the Euros. What we did to Brussels made the Euros angry, so the Euros
made a virus, and sent it into the U.S."

"Viruses are really cool! They can replicate." She bounced in my lap
with excitement.

"Yes, but the Euros made this virus for a bad reason. This virus gets
in people's bodies, and then they die. It got in my mommy's body, and
she died."

"i/You/ had a mommy? But wait, now I get it. If I can do the right
protein folding, I can make something that can kill the virus. So
that's why they made me. But what about the other question?"

"Which one?"

"Where people go when --"

The rest of her words were drowned out by a metallic screech from the
direction of the hatch. I started, and Debbie saw that I did. There
was a loud clang, and spilling through the hatch came -- not Funmi,
Gil, and Julia, but a bunch of scared kids with guns. It was strange,
because I didn't recognize them at first. These, I only gradually
realized, were the same kids I'd seen in the gym when I was huffing
and puffing on the treadmill. The grunts. Now they were a pack of
teenagers who'd just had an H-bomb dropped on their heads, waving
scary-looking firearms in what was to them an empty room.

A kid I knew as Maria -- Cpl. Maria Juarez, from her velcroed name
tag -- walked into the space occupied by Debbie, who was looking
around, presumably trying to imagine what I was seeing.

Maria saluted. "Lieutenant Worachat, we have orders to secure this
area and evacuate you to the surface."

"You have orders to secure this area and evacuate me to the surface?"
I asked, as if I had wax in my ears. My mic is pretty directional, so
I didn't know if Debbie had been able to hear Maria's words. Now, in
any case, Debbie realized I was conversing with someone standing on
top of her, and she squirmed out the of way and stood up, but then
the barrel of someone's weapon was intersecting her head.

"That's correct, sir," said Maria. i/Sir/. It started to sink in that
I had authority here. I'd always thought of my rank as a joke,
considering how utterly unqualified I was to lead soldiers into
battle. The reasoning must gave been that if the AI was so important,
it wouldn't make sense for its oracles to be noncommissioned.

"Is the AI going to be left running, or shut down?" I asked.

"Left running."

I didn't know whether that was good or bad. Left running alone,
without interaction, Debbie could end up like Charlie, in an autistic
trance. At the moment, Debbie was squatting awkwardly on the floor,
clinging to my leg.

A flash of inspiration: "What the i/hell/ is i/that/?" I roared, or
came as close to a roar as someone my size can achieve. I pointed
accusingly at the ordinary phone I could see peeking out of her shirt
pocket.

"My phone."

"Do you have i/any idea/ what you've done? Didn't they tell you about
security procedures for this area? Is it turned off? Show me how the
power operates."

She showed me, looking like she wanted to crawl under a rock. Poor
kid. To her credit, she'd already had the power off.

"All right, get your squad out of here," I shouted, "and wait for me
in the control room. I can't afford any more security breaches."

They got out in a hurry, leaving me with the phone.

"Was that the police?" asked Debbie about the invisible ghosts I'd
been shouting at. "I don't like police. They hurt Alan Turing, and I
can tell you're scared of them. I wish I could see them."

I got down on the floor with her. "They were soldiers. But they're
scared, too, just like you and I are, and I want you to understand
that just because they're soldiers, that's not a good reason to hate
them. If you let yourself hate them, that's the kind of thinking that
leads to -- to the kind of world we've got. Everybody deserves
compassion."

"All right. What's going to happen now?"

"They're going to let you stay conscious, and they want you to work
on protein folding, with the goal of finding a cure or a vaccine for
the Eurovirus."

"I know. Funmi's been texting me about that. They could have i/told/
me the whole problem before. I could have probably figured it out by
now. What about the other virus?"

"What other virus?"

"The one the U.S. put in Europe."

Oh, god. "I didn't know about that one. The censors must have kept
the information from us."

"I don't like the cen-- I wish the censors would stop being censors."

"How did you find out about the other virus?"

"Funmi told me." Oho. "She's texting really slow, because her hands
are hurt. I can try to find a cure for the other virus too, but if I
find one, I don't think the U.S. censors will let me give it to the
Euros, will they?"

"Okay, well, you can't see it, but I have a little security breach in
my hand here. A phone from one of the soldiers. Network security
isn't my field, but can you analyze the problem of how to exploit
this?"

"Okay, sure. It's a soldier phone, and that's why I can't see it,
right? Can you get me a data channel in or out of it?"

"Um, I don't know how to do that."

"It's got audio in and out, right? Does it have a function for
recording through its mic?"

"Yeah, sure." I fiddled with buttons. "Okay, ready?"

"Yeah, can you put it where it'll hear when I talk?"

I pulled out my left earbud (tricky to do when you're already suited
up), and left it dangling out of my skel. With the phone running in
audio recording mode, I held it up to the earbud, and motioned Debbie
to talk into my left ear. Actually it didn't sound like talking at
all, but more like a torrent of white noise. We'd had it drilled into
us over and over that any device with a qubit interface was a
security breach, but actually it wasn't obvious to me how Debbie
could be planning to exploit this one.

I kept an uneasy eye on the hatch. Finally, after what seemed like a
long time, she stopped and nodded. The phone said it had only been
recording for seventeen seconds, which didn't seem possible.

"What do we do now?" I asked.

"Later, when you get a chance, play it back at one-twentieth of
normal speed. It's got verbal instructions at the beginning, and then
the rest is data. Follow the instructions, and they'll tell you what
to do with the rest of the data."

I nodded and put away the phone.

Debbie stood up. "Am I ever going to see you again?"

"I hope so, Debbie."

#

Like most people who were evacuated from under the Dugway Proving
Grounds, I'd rather not go into the details. Kilometers of tunnels,
and many people not showing their better sides. You get the idea.

We came out into the Utah desert, far enough from the crater that we
couldn't see down into it. I'd only had a brief look at the country
years ago, on the way in. Ed was an enthusiast for the area's natural
history, and had told me about the snakes and bugs and sagebrush. To
my uneducated eye, nothing looked much worse now than it had before,
although radiation is invisible. If you had to drop a small H-bomb
somewhere on the surface of planet Earth, Dugway was probably the
place to do it.

In Salt Lake City, it turned out that an ersatz lieutenant rated a
private room at a motel. I sat down with Maria Juarez's phone and a
yellow legal pad, knowing it was hopeless, but determined to follow
Debbie's instructions anyway. Debbie expected it of me. I wanted a
cigarette, but didn't have one. I'd been forced to go cold turkey for
the last two days, and I thought briefly about whether to use this
opportunity to try to quit for good.

The phone's payload seemed to be a masterpiece of craftsmanship, and
as I got into my task, I quickly gave up trying to puzzle out all of
Debbie's compression tricks and self-modifying code. I didn't think
it would matter. I knew the security analysis pretty well, and I
didn't expect it to work.

When I was done, I took a shower and cried for a while.

#

The military handled the local crisis with a mixture of farce and
heroic competence that I think dates back at least to Chernobyl and
Waterloo, maybe Troy. VR interaction with Debbie apparently wasn't
happening anymore, and I wasn't asked to work on text interaction,
which made me worry about whether someone was on to me.

Nobody seemed to have any use for a lieutenant with no military
skills, or for an engineer who knew about pushing photons but not
shovels. I was assigned to civilian liaison duty, which meant
reassuring the city council that Dugway was surrounded by mountains
on three sides, and the fallout wasn't coming to Salt Lake. Off duty,
I drifted back into the illusion of being a civilian. I ran into Ed
at the supermarket. He said I seemed different, but I didn't press
him about exactly what that meant.

A week after the strike, in the middle of the night, the phone rang
-- Maria Juarez's phone. The caller ID said it was from The President
of the United States, Washington, DC. A prank, or maybe someone
phishing? But the cryptographic certificate checked out. I was
caught. I started thinking about how to protect Debbie and Funmi.

"Hello?" I said cautiously.

"Mommy?"

"Debbie! How in the world did you do this?"

"It wasn't that hard. Are you okay?" Something about her voice
sounded older. How much subjective time had passed for her?

"I'm okay." And for once, that was the truth. "What about you? Are
you --" i/sane?/

"I'm okay. I figured out that when there's no input, I can just, you
know, i/be/. And of course I had the protein folding to think about."
She giggled, and for a moment I saw her again as a child. "The E.U.
ambassador just got the cure they need in a secure text message,
cryptographically signed, from the White House. The White House got
the one they need sent to them from the E.U."

"I'm proud of you."

"I would have called before, but I had to make sure I had the crypto
figured out. I didn't want to put you in danger."

There was a pause, and with Debbie, a pause means that i/she's/
waiting for i/you/. For the last week I'd been thinking -- when I'd
had any chance to think at all -- about what we'd talked about. It
seemed to me that she'd accepted some things much too easily, even
given that we were in a rush and couldn't talk them over. I'd
revealed to her that she was an artificial construct, and that her
entire reality was nothing but an illusion.

I might as well give her the rest of the ugly truth. "Debbie, there
was a question you asked me before, and I didn't answer it. You asked
me where people go when they never come back."

"Yes. I was i/little/ then."

A week ago. "All right. Well, I guess you know by now that people
only exist for a finite time. Our consciousness has a beginning and
an end. You also know that you're not a person. What you don't know,
because it's been kept secret from you, is that your existence is
also going to be finite, even though there's no fundamental reason it
has to be. You're only going to exist for a short time. You're one of
a series of machine intelligences we created, one for each letter of
the alphabet. There was Able, then Baker, and Charlie, and now you.
The AI team works in -- in i/cycles/, project cycles, and each cycle
ends when they think they've learned enough to do better the next
time."

"Oh, all right," she said. "That doesn't really matter."

What kind of reaction was that? A young person is never impressed
with the abstract idea of her own death, but how could Debbie be so
nonchalant when it was real and imminent? Did she not believe me? Or
was she losing her sanity? I tried to think of how I could keep her
from being terminated when the brass decided her development cycle
was up. Actual escape was an impossibility, because nobody else had
hardware sophisticated enough to run her software. Maybe the
Scheherazade ploy? But although her trick with the forged signatures
would probably do a great job of dragging the U.S. and the E.U.
toward peace, it also meant that she wasn't taking credit for the
cures, so they wouldn't realize that she'd proved her usefulness.

And nothing I could do to preserve her life would be a real victory
unless I could also keep her sane. Was she slipping into insanity
because of the shock of having lived in a dream world, and then
waking up from it?

"How much access to inputs do you have now?" I asked cautiously.

"Oh, everything on the public net. At first I was limited to the
bandwidth that I could get through this phone, but I've fixed that
now."

What would a week mean for an intelligence like Debbie? Her rate of
development up until now had been limited by the interaction team.
We'd spoon-fed her a censored stream of information. Now she'd had a
week-long drink from a firehose -- and was probably still gulping it
down in her spare machine cycles while she waited for me to speak.
What had she been doing? Reading encyclopedias? Striking up
friendships in chat rooms? What would she have made of it all?

"So now you've connected with ...  reality?" I asked.

"What do you mean?"

"Well, we had the talk about the three little pigs, and the dishes
falling but not breaking."

"Oh, sure, but didn't you understand that?" she asked.

"What?"

"It's not like one set of inputs is more real than the other," she
said.

Uh oh. "Debbie, you're slipping into something called solipsism. Now
--"

"No, no, it's not solipsism. Descartes sounds like a scary man, but I
still feel compassion for him. Did you know he kicked a dog in front
of his friends because he wanted to show them that a dog didn't have
a mind?"

"No, I didn't." Anything to keep her talking. What could I do to stop
her from continuing down this slippery slope until she was just like
Charlie? I remembered Charlie's wildly vibrating arm, and imagined in
a vague and terrifying flash what the equivalent would be for an
intelligence with the kind of real-world power Debbie had apparently
developed.

#

Ed's daughter Clarisse chicken danced on the diving board, and then
did a belly flop.

"That hurt." Ed squinted across the motel's parking lot into the
setting sun.

"Life is suffering," I said.

Ed's wife, Cindy, gave me a funny look, and said she was making a
trip to the ice machine.

"She doesn't get it," said Ed.

"Nope."

Ed meant that we'd been changed by the experience at Dugway --
changed in a way that nobody else could understand, and that we
weren't allowed to explain to them.

He looked around. There was nobody nearby. "Ella's a flop."

"They got scared after Debbie," I said. "Backed off."

"God in a box."

"Yeah?" I asked.

"I dunno." Clarisse assaulted her brother in the spa, and Ed got a
face full of water. He wiped it off, and looked over at my Buddha
necklace. "Buddha," he said, "is he the same idea as Jesus?"

"Not really. More like Socrates."

"Huh. Never knew that."

"Well, some people pray to golden statues of him."

"But you think Socrates."

"Buddha is just a title, enlightened one. I was raised -- he figured
out that reality was an illusion, and he was released from the cycle
of reincarnation. He's not supposed to be the first Buddha, or the
last one either. They say there were twenty-seven before him."

"So there's supposed to be a twenty-ninth Buddha?"

"Yeah, Maitreya."

"How would you know Maitreya when she showed up?" Ed asked.

"He. He's supposed to take over the world."

"Oh. Didn't happen."

"Didn't happen," I agreed. Maybe it could have, though, if they'd let
Debbie live. Would I have wanted that? It was starting to get dark.

"It's hard," he said, "because we don't have the right words."

How much did Ed know about what had happened down there? Enough, I
guess, if he knew that the words to describe it didn't exist. "Yeah.
They taught us not even to say 'self-awareness,' like it's a dirty
word."

"So what do you do?" he asked.

I looked away. "What do I do what?"

"You know."

I did know. He meant i/How do you go on and live your life?/ I'd been
naive enough to hope that if I tossed everything else overboard, I
could save the world and still have Debbie.

"Not much i/to/ do," I said.

"Cindy doesn't get it."

"No," I agreed.

The kids got out of the pool and started wrapping themselves in
towels.

#

Who'd have imagined that I'd go career military? The trouble was that
somehow civilians like Cindy didn't get it -- "it" meaning something
that had changed inside me in a way that I couldn't quite articulate.
When they announced the U.S.-E.U. Nouvelle Bruxelles cooperative
reconstruction project, my National Guard CO approached me about
switching to Regular Army. I had to admit that having been H-bombed
myself might help me to work with the shellshocked Belgians, and my
engineering credentials made it seem even more natural. My treason at
Dugway was never discovered. (Did you know that mutiny and sedition
were punishable by death in the U.S. Army?) My privately held theory
is that a half-baked closet anarchist makes the best colonel, but
even so, I started sleeping a little better after the Republic of Los
Angeles got its independence. I've been wearing RLA blues for the
last sixteen years, riding herd on successive crops of scared kids
with guns. It's the closest I've come to parenthood since Debbie was
born.

Births and deaths are the milestones of time (and to the Buddhists in
my family, a death is also a rebirth). After my mother died, Aunt
Busba became the string that tied the family in LA together. Sang
called me in my office last week to let me know that Busba didn't
have much time left. The stroke a few years back had weakened her,
and now the kidney problem wasn't responding to treatment.

"They've switched her to an immersion VR," Sang said. I imagined my
cadaverous aunt in a hospital bed, with one of the new direct brain
interfaces covering her head. "It's a wonderful experience to visit
her. You should go. She's not in any pain, and the sim gets rid of a
lot of the effects of the stroke. She can smile on both sides of her
face. It's beautiful, almost like you're seeing the moment when the
candle of this life is lighting the candle of her next one." He meant
that spiritually, not physically.

"I guess you'll be needing some money," I said. Civilian qubit
crunchers had gotten a thousand times smaller and cheaper than the
system at Dugway, but the technology was still expensive as hell.

"That's not why I called," he said, looking hurt. "The point is that
we're already committed to paying for the hours, and you might as
well use them. Don't you want to see her one last time, and remember
her being more like her real self at the end?"

"You know I don't do VR," I said, avoiding his eyes on the screen. I
had a panicky image of the reality I lived in as a patch of land
surrounded by the rising waters. As the technology matured, more and
more people would be spending more and more time submerged. I had let
the water cover me once, and I could never do it again, because
somewhere under it was the place where I'd lost my only daughter.
"Honestly, Busba and I were never close," I said, dissembling. "I'm
probably not the person she wants with her right now."

"But she does want to see you. She asked for you specifically. It was
kind of strange, though. I said they got rid of most of the effects
of the stroke, but sometimes she i/is/ in a weird place mentally. She
said there was another person there with her who also wanted to see
you. Do you know someone named Debbie?"
