b/Fork/

Timelegging ain't a nice business, but this job seemed like it was
going to be all right. Well it couldn't help being an improvement
over the last one, where I'd had to tell a dope-peddler whether his
customer was really a cop. (He wasn't.)

When I stepped off the streetcar, a Santa Ana wind was blowing
through the palm trees. Nice address. Automatic elevator, but a
Japanese butler opened the door. I put out my cigarette, but I might
as well have nursed it --- the client kept me waiting. I didn't mind,
because his attitude spelled privilege and money. I mentally tacked
an extra hundred onto my price.

I sat on the davenport, and didn't drink the ice water the butler
brought. It was a hot day, though, and once I was alone I took a warm
sip from the flask in my pocket. The LA Times was on the coffee
table, something about Mao and Truman haggling over what was left of
Moscow. I wasn't going to bite my nails until it caused me to get a
greeting from my draft board back in Chicago.

I poured the ice water out into a potted ficus so I wouldn't get so
thirsty looking at it. My profession is stricter than jockeying or
prize-fighting. Doing the nuclear voodoo to the water in the flask
cost Franz more than we made in a month, and there'd be hell to pay
if I diluted myself with the untreated stuff. I thought about another
sip from the flask, but decided not to risk it. If I ended up having
to excuse myself later to go to the can, I wouldn't have any way to
recover the waste except in that same flask. Anyway, you'd be
surprised how little water a guy my size can get by on.

The butler took me into the study to meet the customer, a Mr. Davis.
Young guy, blond, nice suit. Without rubbernecking, I managed to
catch an impression of lots of carved wood, books, and leather. I
added another C-note onto my bill, and wondered if he'd read the
books.

"Mr. Pawliak? Rick Davis."

"Pleased to meet you, Mr. Davis. What can I do for you?"

"This is all strictly confidential." His eyebrows went up, even if he
didn't make it sound like a question.

"I wouldn't last long in this business if I didn't know how to keep
quiet."

"And the tachyon emissions?"

"Like I said, I wouldn't last long. I ain't on the scientific end,
but the man who splits the atoms says not to worry, long as the hop
is short. How much of a loop do you need, half a day?"

"Less. Four hours, or maybe six."

"They wouldn't get enough clicks to notice unless they had the
detector sitting in my lap when I made the fork. Military snoops are
watching for the flash from a Chinese spy squad looping across a
week. You don't get much heat from a short jump, one guy."

"Two. I need to come with you. You can do that, can't you?"

Now my eyebrows got their turn to go up. "Yeah, it works the same as
it does with my clothes and my shoes. They're close to my body, so
they go with me, and snap back at the end. It's the same way with
your body --- easiest if you curl up in a ball and I hug you. But are
you sure it's really necessary? There's some risk involved. You could
lose a finger or a toe."

"It's necessary."

"I'll need to know what it's about."

He hesitated. "Very well. You see, Mr. Pawliak, I've become close to
two different women." He waited for me to say something, but I kept
mum and waited for him to spill it. He covered up for his nerves by
pulling a chrome cigarette case out of his pocket. "Smoke?"

"Sure, thanks." Smoking keeps my appetite down, and the little
ceremony might make it easier for him to talk to me.  What a
cigarette leaves on my lungs isn't enough to cause any real dilution,
plus it's mostly carbon, and Franz says what makes the chain reaction
work is only the treated hydrogen --- if they could make bourbon or
chocolate bon-bons without any hydrogen in them, I could have all I
wanted. We lit up, and I waited for him to go on.

"I've become close to two different women," he said a second time. He
must've rehearsed that line. "I care about them both, but it's gotten
to the point where I need to make a choice. I want to ask one or the
other to marry me. The difficult part is that the one who would be my
first choice --- I'm not sure if she'd say yes. The social circle I
move in is very small. If she turned me down, I'm afraid word might
get back to the other one, and I think it would hurt her to know that
she was my second choice." And, I added mentally, it might hurt her
so much that he'd get another "no."

I nodded, trying to look sympathetic. Davis was a weasel, but nowhere
near as bad as the dope-peddler. "So you want to make the split with
me, and pop the question to the first lady. Afterward, we snap back
to the time we left. If she said yes, then you go through the
proposal again, knowing she'll say yes. If she said no, you propose
to the second lady instead."

"That's almost it. I actually want to make two trips, one to try
proposing to Susan, and one to Vera."

I thought about it. It sounded like he wasn't even sure which girl he
liked more, so he wanted to see all the cards before he decided how
to play his hand. A reasonable attitude in general, even if it seemed
a little lousy in this particular situation. Maybe Susan would fall
at his feet, but Vera would just say, "Yeah, I guess so." Or maybe
Susan would say, "Oh, yes, Rick, yes! --- but Father doesn't approve,
so it'll mean giving up my trust fund." Or Vera: "Why, that's just
peachy, Rick, and for our honeymoon we can dip into those nine
thousand shares of U.S. Steel that Auntie gave me for Christmas."

"It's still not necessary for you to make the two forks with me, Mr.
Davis. It drives up the cost of the operation, and like I said, it's
a little risky. I can just do the loops solo. The other you proposes,
he gets the answer, tells me how it went, and then I snap back and
tell the original you."

"Yes, but the other me, what happens to him then?"

"You'd have to ask Professor Einstein about that, but I don't know if
even he can say for sure. Some of the scientific johnnies think
universes breed like rabbits, just naturally, and forks happen all
the time without us even noticing. God plays dice, you know."

"And some say that after you snap back from a fork, the alternative
universe you were visiting just vanishes in a puff of smoke."

"Nobody knows." Actually that was pretty much how I had it figured
myself, even if I didn't have equations to back it up. But I liked to
think that the forks happened naturally, and when I did a loop, I was
just hitching a ride on a universe that was going to be a dead-end
anyway. "The you that ends up in the other side of the fork gets a
full refund, of course."

"But if I go with you, there's only one me, and I remember the whole
trip."

"Yes."

"I want to have the memory of my first, real proposal to my wife."

I thought it was a rationalization with more holes in it than a
fishnet. If the "poof" theory was right, then when Davis and I
snapped back, the other universe would dead-end, and the copies of
his lady friends would pop like soap bubbles. Real sentimental. But I
let it ride, and named a price. Davis accepted, and I got out of
there with my pride almost intact. The money was good, at least, and
that would make Franz and Tino happy. Franz had a daughter studying
music at Stanford. I don't know if she ever found out where he got
his money. Tino ran the hydroponic farm to grow my food; he'd be
sending a big chunk out of his share to his family in Oaxaca.
Thinking about all that made me feel a little less like a louse.

Susan's trip came first, on a hot Wednesday afternoon. Davis hadn't
told me much about her, and I didn't really need to know --- I wasn't
being used as a gumshoe, just as transportation. We got ready for the
fork in his study. He handed me the money, a wad of twenties with a
red rubber band around it. I counted it, and put it on his desk where
it would stay nice and safe.

We did the fork on the floor, with me wrapped around him like the
shell around an oyster, holding the lead pillbox in one hand. I
opened the pillbox one-handed, and then Davis fidgeted and almost
made me drop the pill. Franz had tweaked me real good that morning,
so the treated hydrogen in my body was like a pistol on a hair
trigger. I felt the chain reaction starting before I'd even finished
swallowing, and I only had a split second to focus on my recall
symbol. (I use the traditional one, a little Hindu squiggle that
means "om," but I know one legger who always visualizes a chocolate
ice cream cone.)

"Let's do it," Davis said.

"It's done," I told him, and dumped him out of my lap as polite as if
he was my granddad's favorite whore. "We're forked."

"The hell you say!"

Predictable. One thing I always hate about these passenger jobs is
that the cargo never wants to believe that the fork has really
happened. If he'd had the Rhine-Soal training, like me, he wouldn't
have had any doubts, but an untrained brain can't sense a fork any
more than a dog can tap his foot to bebop.

"I'll prove it to you," I said. I'd handled this problem before. "You
got a light?"

He handed me the chrome lighter that matched his cigarette case. I
took the roll of bills off of his desk and lit them in his ashtray.
"Convinced now?" I asked him. "These are copies that only exist on
this side, and they're not coming back with us, because they weren't
in on the chain reaction. The originals are waiting for me when I get
back."

That little piece of sacrilege always shuts them up. He looked
around, like they always do when they finally start to believe it:
nothing here was ever going to matter to our own timeline, and you
could do whatever the hell you wanted to anything in it. I reminded
him to get the diamond ring out of his desk drawer. If he'd kept it
on him during the fork, there would only have been one copy of it,
and he would've had to pry it off the girl's finger if he wanted it
to snap back with us. He put the ring in his jacket pocket, and that
reminded him to pull out a smoke, but his fingers were shaking. I was
used to passengers getting nerves, but his seemed a little excessive.
Even if he was still worried that it was all a scam, nothing all that
bad would happen: he'd propose, Susan would say yes or no, and he'd
live with it. I had him figured now as a guy with a low anxiety
threshold.

That should have been my first hint that something about this job
didn't smell so good, but I didn't actually start to wise up until we
got to where we were picking up the girl. We got in his white Coupe
de Ville, with me driving and him giving directions. When he told me
to park, I saw that we were across the street from a place that
billed itself as the Amalie Noether School for Gifted Girls. We were
early. After we waited twenty minutes, the bell rang, and Susan came
out and waved to Davis. She looked like eighteen years and eleven
minutes. Gifted? I could see what gifts Davis was interested in. She
wasn't a Ziegfield chorus girl, but what she was, in her own way, was
enough to make a man sit up and beg. Red hair, braided in pigtails.
Doe eyes and creamy skin and freckles. She had flesh in all the right
places, and almost all of it had made up its mind to stop being baby
fat. With the hair, a blue skirt, and a white blouse, she made me
want to stand and pledge allegiance. Davis introduced me as his
driver, and they cuddled up in the back. As we pulled out, I saw the
other girls trying not to act too envious.

Well, who was I to argue? It didn't fall under the Mann Act, and the
girl obviously wanted to be with him, and ... and anyway, if her
universe still existed tomorrow, there wouldn't be a Rick Davis in it
anymore, maybe just a girl with a diamond ring from a vanished
fiancee. She might be better off than the copy of her in the universe
we'd be going back to. i/Would/ this girl, and this universe, still
exist tomorrow? I dunno. Next time you see God, ask him for me.

First Davis took her shopping on Broadway. She came out of Harris and
Frank's in a sleeveless green dress and matching heels that looked a
lot more grown up, even if she didn't. We stopped to let her make a
call from a pay phone. (His nickel. Sweet of him.) It was getting
late, but it was still hot, and there wasn't a cloud above us, just
the streetcar cables stretching across a blue sky.

He took her to the Avalon Hotel in Beverly Hills for dinner. I
chain-smoked out in the car, and tried not to think about the hot
dogs I'd seen through the window at the Kress lunch counter. They
were taking a long time about it, and I started to get nervous.
Obviously he didn't want me jogging his elbow while he proposed, but
I needed to stay close to him, because Franz had set me up for a
maximum of four hours, and if Davis wasn't there for the snap, he'd
be left behind. I thought about going in and finding a table in a
corner, but I hadn't brought any money with me, so what was I going
to do, order an expensive dinner and not take a bite, then skip out
on the tab?

Finally he came out --- alone. I'd never been so glad to see a heel
like Davis, or so happy not to see a beautiful girl. I hoped his
generosity extended to cab fare, or at least another nickel so she
could call her mother again. Maybe Vera would turn him down too, and
then I could throw myself a party to celebrate.

"All right, let's oil the wheels, Pawliak."

For once I was glad to do what he said. I didn't need to look at my
watch to know that time was running out. I could feel that giant
rubber band in my gut stretching tighter and tighter, like the way it
feels when the drummer in a jazz band gives that roll in the break
for the first solo. When the field is that close to collapsing, I
think sometimes even people who haven't had the training can feel the
tingle in the air. In a pinch, if we didn't make it back to Davis's
apartment in time, the two of us could huddle in the car at a stop
light, and do the snap right there. Doing it that way, we'd still end
up back in his study, but I wanted to avoid it. It wouldn't matter so
much that people on the sidewalk would think there was something
queer going on --- we'd never see them again --- but doing it in a
rush that way, with a nervous passenger, it would be easy to mess up
and leave behind one of his arms or legs. That would hurt my
professional pride, and be hard to explain to the gendarmes. He also
hadn't paid for the second trip yet, and I figured if I was going to
put up with a punk like Davis, I might as well make it a touchdown
and not just a field goal.

We made it in time --- I guess he'd picked the Avalon because it was
close to his place. It was getting dark by now in his study, and we
didn't bother turning on the lights. He crawled into my lap, and I
felt the bulge from the little jewelry box. He might as well have
thrown it away, because it wasn't going back with us. I closed my
eyes and visualized my recall symbol. I felt the firecrackers pop
inside my skull, but I guess all Davis noticed was that there was
sunlight coming in through the window again, and the ring box wasn't
pressing into his side anymore. He stood up, and then bent over to
retch, but nothing came up. I'd warned him not to eat too much,
because that's the usual effect when your dinner suddenly disappears
out of your stomach. But I noticed something in the brighter light as
he was bending over, with the lapels of his jacket hanging open.
There was a scratch on his chest, and a rip in his shirt where the
seam under his left arm had torn apart.

I took the money off of his desk, and he looked in the drawer and
checked that the original ring was still there. "All right, Pawliak,
you can go." We walked out into the living room, and the houseboy
appeared. "Morita, if Miss Steen calls this afternoon, tell her I
wasn't able to keep our date. Pawliak, I'll see you again at seven."

It was starting to look like I'd got myself into an interesting
situation. The torn shirt and the scratch, along with Davis's excess
of nerves, painted a picture. I hailed a cab, kept it waiting while I
dropped off most of the cash at home, and got back to the school
again as the girls were coming out. I watched her from across the
street while she waited there for him. When I saw her turn to go, I
jaywalked over to her. The crossing guard gave me a dirty look. I
came up alongside her.

"Miss Steen?"

"Yes?" It made me sweat, the way she looked at me with those kitten
eyes.

"I'm a business associate of Rick Davis. He couldn't make it."

"Why not?"

"Something came up. The boys have been laying bets on when you two
would announce your engagement."

She snorted adorably. "You don't really know Rick, do you?" She
i/was/ gifted. She took a step back, and said in a louder voice, "Who
sent you? Was it my parents?"

I closed the gap between us and said softly, "You could be getting in
more trouble than you realize."

Here's a tip: never make yourself disagreeable to the pupils at the
Amalie Noether School for Gifted Girls, because they're smarter then
you and me. Miss Susan Steen screamed like the whistle on a freight
train, and I found out that the crossing guard was a retired Irish
cop who felt very tender and protective toward young girls with red
hair and freckles. What was I going to do, run away? Fight? I know
when I'm outclassed. I acted innocent and confused, but I didn't have
her doe eyes. I found myself sitting in a jail cell.

It was a pretty nice jail. They even offered me a baloney sandwich
wrapped in wax paper. That mythical phone call? --- at this jail, it
actually existed (they probably had a Tooth Fairy on duty, too). I
used it to call Franz.

They let me stew for a few hours to see if I'd admit anything. It was
good that my bladder wasn't full. I hadn't had most of Davis's wad of
twenties on me --- or my rod, and that was especially good, because
it was licensed to Joe Pawliak, but my ID said I was James Pollock.
They probably had a good laugh about the water in the flask. I had a
long imaginary conversation with the crossing guard, explaining to
him what kind of a guy I really was, but I never quite got him to see
it my way. Eventually the cops allowed as how I hadn't done anything,
and I'd better not do it again.

When I got my watch back it was a quarter to seven. Bad. Davis had
already set up his date with Vera, and he wasn't going to be happy if
he missed it. Not only that, but if we postponed the hop to a
different day, Susan Steen might eventually get past Morita, and tell
Davis about our encounter. I thought about walking away: Davis didn't
have my address, or even my first name. As Franz walked out with me
to his car, I was still trying to decide whether discretion was the
better part. The trouble was that even if I disappeared, Davis would
probably find another timelegger, and if my suspicions were right,
that would spell trouble for this other sister. It seemed like a good
reason to keep doing the job. It seemed like there was always a good
reason.

As it turned out, Franz didn't even give me the choice. I got in the
driver's side of his Nash (Franz is a menace behind the wheel), and
he got in the passenger's seat and spilled a bunch of hardware out of
the glove compartment, right there in the parking lot behind the
police station. The only legal items in the pile were my little
twenty-two and his circular slide rule. I have to hand it to Franz,
he's a cool customer. He dumped the portable detector down the front
of my shirt and tossed my flask into the back seat. He pushed my
shirt and jacket sleeves up, and before I could say a word he'd
already found a vein, stuck the needle in, and pulled the sleeve back
down. Now I didn't look too funny, just a guy in a car with a bulge
in his shirt the size of a quart of milk, and a long rubber tube
coming out of his sleeve with syringe at the other end. The
detector's little liquid nitrogen dewar felt cool on my skin.

Franz didn't have the electronic counter with him to hook up to the
detector. He just listened to the clicks coming straight out of the
speaker. I don't know a stable muonic hydrogen atom from a ping pong
ball, but I can tell when I'm in the presence of genius. In his own
way, Franz was as much of an artist as Diz or Bird. First he laid the
syringe in the ashtray in his door, and got a far-away look in his
eyes as he studied the second hand on his watch and listened to the
clicks, which sounded like popcorn when it's just starting to pop.
Then, for comparison, he brought the syringe over to the seat between
us. The popcorn started to pop faster. He never even touched the
slide rule, just measured out a few cc's of the treated saline into
my bloodstream, yanked out the needle, and slapped a bandage on my
arm. He handed me a lead pillbox, and I was tuned up and ready to go.

I headed for Davis's place, trying to hurry without setting myself up
for a traffic ticket. While we were driving, Franz gathered up his
gear and stuffed it in a grocery sack, and I let him out at a stop
light. I was only a little late. Davis answered the door himself, and
we did the fork in his study again. Since we were running late for
his date, we took Franz's Nash, which I'd left double-parked out
front. I was almost too keyed up to notice how hungry I was, but my
belly wanted me to know that no matter what the clock said, it
thought twelve hours had passed since lunch. It made me cranky, and I
let off some steam by telling Davis that if he wanted to lose a limb
he could damn well do it with a pocket knife, not on the job with me
--- this time around I was going to keep an eye on him, and when it
was time to scoot, we'd scoot.

I guess I'd been expecting another cradle robbery, so it came as a
bit of a surprise when he brought her out to the car. I mean, when a
guy tells you he's got a date with a frail named Vera, who thinks of
Vera Williams? She looked a little older than I remembered her from
the movies, but that made sense. Thinking back, the last picture I'd
seen her in had been i/Satan Met a Lady/, and I remembered the date,
because it was the day after we whipped the Japs at Pearl Harbor, the
same day we all found out about time loops.

He told her I was his bodyguard. We went to the Avalon again, and to
give myself an excuse to occupy the bar, I wasted some money on a
plate of brook trout that I wasn't going to eat. The televisor had
the countdown for Lindy's new rocket, but I was paying attention to
Davis and Williams in the mirror behind the bar. They ordered
champagne, and she started acting sloppy before she'd finished her
first glass. I don't waste much skull sweat on the gossip columns,
but you don't have to read Hedda Hopper religiously to know that Vera
Williams isn't that much of a lightweight. He'd obviously slipped her
a Mickey Finn.

It was pretty much what I'd been afraid of. Davis had a whole system
worked out: drug them, rape them, and then pop back out of the fork.
He was working it the same way on one woman after another. The jazz
about a marriage proposal was obviously pure hokum, maybe just for my
benefit, or maybe for the women's, too. I did a slow burn, thinking
about the Susan Steen in the other fork. If the drug could KO Vera
Williams' liver in the first round, it must have gone through Susan's
like Sherman through Georgia. I didn't know whether to be sad or
proud that the kid stayed with it for long enough to tear his shirt,
but she must have been out cold by the time her universe fizzled. I
said a prayer for her over the trout, but that message probably ended
up in the dead letter office.

Pretty soon they got up from their table, and Davis steered her over
to the front desk and took a room as Mr. and Mrs. Williams. I helped
him get her into the elevator, and the colored kid in the pillbox hat
pretended not to notice anything unusual. I had it all planned out. I
high-tailed it back down to the lobby, gave them two minutes, and
then called up to the room.

"Who is it?"

"Davis, it's Pawliak. The lobby's full of photographers. They must've
tailed us over here. Get your trousers on, and I'll come up and help
you gather up your stuff. We'll go down the back stairs."

"But ---"

I hung up on him, and ran up the stairs. I knocked, and Davis opened
the door a crack. Then I felt a foot planted in my backside. Like I
said, I'm a little guy. I wasn't expecting it, and I don't think
Davis saw it coming either. I flew through the door and brought Davis
down like he was a quarterback getting sacked. The door was slamming
shut again, and someone in denims and tennis shoes was jumping over
us. I got off of Davis, and saw Susan Steen standing there, holding
my little pearl-handled twenty-two. It flashed through my brain that
we really had been tailed, after all, and that she must have watched
me and Franz in the car behind the police station, and seen the gun
along with the other hardware.

"So that's your racket, Rick." There were tears in her eyes, but she
wasn't handling the gun like a little girl who didn't know how it
worked. I had time to see that she had the safety off, and her finger
inside the trigger guard.

It was a classy scene. Vera Williams was sprawled across the bed
crosswise. Her feet were dangling just above the carpet, as if she
was trying to point with her toes to where her skirt was lying.

"Honey," Davis said, "calm down." He cringed against the closed door,
like he was too weak to stand. "Think about what you're doing."

"It doesn't matter what I do, does it? My world is just a fork you're
visiting. You son of a bitch!" The gun spoke, and Davis crumpled back
down on the floor. His left temple was a bloody mess.

Vera Williams stirred. Maybe the gunshot had interrupted a good dream.

"Gonna shoot me too, baby?"

"You tried to warn me."

I had to think fast. She'd recognized the hardware in the car, and
she'd stayed cooler than I probably would have about being in a fork
that might fizzle. The Noether School seemed to have more in its
curriculum than I'd figured, but she obviously hadn't thought it out
past this point. If I visualized my recall symbol right now, I'd be
out of this mess in the hotel, but it would look bad if Morita saw me
spend most of the day with Davis, and then Davis disappeared. And
besides, what would happen to Susan here in this universe? Maybe it
didn't matter because she'd stop existing, but that was just what my
own gut told me about how the rules worked. I didn't like the image
of me traipsing through various universes and leaving a trail of
Susans in rough spots.

I could cuddle up with the corpse, and then snap back. That would
leave this Susan with nothing more to explain than a pistol in her
hand, but it would make things even hotter for me when I got back.
i/Gosh, officer, I don't know how Davis ended up dead today. Nobody
heard a shot, right? Oh, you say he was shot with my gun?/ That
wouldn't wash.

But I'd underestimated Susan. Even if she hadn't planned it past this
point, she turned out to be ready to think on her feet, once I
explained a couple things to her in a hurry. She helped me half-drag,
half-carry the body down the stairs and across the dark parking lot
to Franz's Nash. We crammed Davis down into the space on the floor
behind the passenger seat, and molded his hand around the gun. Then
we took Olympic Boulevard to the coast and headed north, partly just
for the sake of having somewhere to go, and partly to get out of town
to where we could monkey around with a corpse without raising a
ruckus.

It was a beautiful night. Maybe I'm callous, but for a while I forgot
to worry that there was a stiff in the back, or that the girl riding
with me was a murderess. In a few hours, she probably wouldn't even
exist. I won't make excuses for her. She doesn't need them. She took
the hand she was dealt, and she did a big favor to Vera Williams,
maybe to some other dames, too --- women in nearby universes, who
I'll never meet. If I felt crummy, it wasn't because Davis was dead
today, it was because until today I'd played a part in his little act.

We stopped at the Bar-B-Q Shack in Malibu and picked up chicken and
french fries for her in a cardboard basket. I won't say it was a
festive occasion, because we knew it might be Susan's last night on
earth, but we talked, and she ate while I drove. She told me a few
things I could say to her other self that hadn't made either fork.

We made Ventura around one in the morning, and I was starting to feel
the field crackling like the air before a thunderstorm. We stopped on
a beach and lifted Davis out and onto the sand. He was curled up in a
ball, real tight and stiff. The crater in his head looked like the
slug had exited, which was good, because otherwise the coroner would
have wondered what happened to it.

I got Davis in my lap, Susan gave me a kiss on the cheek, and then I
snapped back to Davis's study at 7:05 P.M., with a stiff, cold corpse
that had been shot hours before.

While I was in a jail cell.

I figured the gun was in the Nash's glove compartment, and before I
could put it in Davis's hand I needed to find someplace where I could
fire it and recover the slug. Then I realized that the other Susan
might be waiting outside, wondering which side of the fork she was
on. She might have the gun already. I went to the kitchen sink to
wash my hands, and started rehearsing what I was going to say to her.
The Susan who'd gone with me to Ventura had told me enough things to
say so I could convince this one about what had really happened. But
the more I worked over the words in my mind, the more I realized that
it was turning into the same imaginary conversation I'd had with the
crossing guard while I was sitting in that jail cell. I could tell
her the story, and she'd believe it, but it was the story of a man
who'd been doing all the wrong things with his life. I thought about
Franz and Tino. I thought about Franz's daughter at Stanford, and
Tino's family in Oaxaca. Then I leaned over the sink and drank as
much water from the tap as my stomach could hold.
