b/The Pass/

The doe startled and bolted, so Chinchy Herrera put her arrow into
the buck instead. Instantly she regretted it. It wasn't big for a
mule deer buck, but it was still probably double the weight of the
doe that she'd intended to take.

She dressed it and then slogged homeward with the hot sun on her
back, alternating between dragging the carcass and staggering along
with it in a fireman's carry. It would have been impossible except
that she was a big girl, and it was a steep drop down through the
foothills to the village where Bristlecone, California, had once been.

The men would all want to hear the story of how she'd killed it, as
if that was the hard part. Chinchy was a novelty because she was the
girl who brought back more meat than any two men combined. Nobody
would say, "Chinchy, how far did you have to carry that monster? Does
your backbone feel cracked in half?" Not even "I bet your feet hurt."
Oh, they'd honor her all right. Give her the big, fatty liver,
crisped on the outside and bleeding raw at the center. The thought of
it made her want to puke. Sweat dripped down into her eye, and she
wiped it on the buck's belly fur.

She had a rope with her, and what she really wanted to do was haul
most of the carcass up onto a tree branch. One haunch would be a
feast for Mom and the other kids tonight. But that would seem like
hoarding, and people would talk. i/Just like her father, you know
about him./ Actually, Chinchy's father was striding across the earth
somewhere in the last days of man. He'd had better things to do than
you-scratch-my-back-and-I'll-pick-your-lice-off.

Her feet weren't too bad coming down the sandy part of the ridge.
They plunged in with every step, like in fresh snow. But then she got
to the rocky part, and her toes started jamming into the front of her
deerskin boots. She was considering whether to check for blisters and
readjust her load when her hunter's eye caught sight of a man
watching her from the shade of an oak tree. She veered toward him,
and after a delay he came up to meet her. One of his soles made a
flapping noise with each step.

"Want some help with that?" It was a stranger with bad teeth and a
sunburn partially hidden by dirt.

"Uh." She let the deer fall to the ground, mainly to make sure she
could defend herself if she had to. She'd never met a human she
didn't know. It wasn't unheard of, but it was a threat. The usual
reason you didn't know him would be that he'd had his ass kicked out
of town and had been circling like a turkey vulture ever since. "I
don't know you."

"Yeah, but I think maybe I know you." The man chuckled through his
ratty beard. "Thought I might find you up here."

Oh, crap. Worst i/possible/ situation. This guy rapes and kills her,
and then to cover up his crime he hides her body where nobody will
find it --- not until her brain has rotted and it's too late to
transfer her to the Cloud.

"Hey, don't freak out," he said. Without realizing it, she'd taken
two steps back, brought her compound bow down from her shoulder, and
nocked an arrow. "Heh heh." That annoying chuckle again, nervous this
time. "You're Chinchy, right? I'm your father."

"The hell you are." i/This/ couldn't be him. Obviously. No way.

"Mark Herrera, that's me. Sorry I couldn't be here when you were ..."

Chinchy drew back on the bowstring just enough to feel the cams turn.
She'd oiled them the night before with bear fat.

"...could you point that thing a little farther away from me?"

"Prove it."

"Okay, that's reasonable. Sure, I can see's how you need time to
adjust. It's not easy for you. Prove it, okay." He looked away and
pulled on an earlobe. "Do you still have that little paper umbrella?
I found that in a bar over by Coso Flats. People took the liquor, but
they didn't notice the umbrella. I brought it back for you when you
were about three."

The red umbrella didn't open and close anymore, but it was still
stored in Chinchy's special box that her younger brothers and sisters
weren't allowed to touch. The umbrella went in the box's back corner,
underneath the old coin that had Sacagawea on one side and an eagle
on the other. If this was really her father, then ... striding across
the earth in the last days of man must have a way of making you not
look your best.

"I think I might remember that," she said. "What color was it?"

"Red, wasn't it?"

"I think I used to have something like that, but it was yellow."

"Really? I remember it red. Maybe someone else gave you a yellow one
after that."

"I guess you wouldn't know what anybody else gave me, after you took
off."

"It wasn't like I wanted to leave, you know. They said I was
hoarding, which was true. Kicked me out for it. You want to go sit in
the shade? How's Carly doing these days?"

"Mom's all right." The sun i/was/ hot.

They sat under the oak. There was blood from the deer on Chinchy's
shoulder, drying and getting sticky. She shooed away flies. She found
out that her father herded sheep, an animal that she only knew about
from crumbly old paper books and the know-its. Sheep were what he'd
been exiled for hoarding. Maybe the two of them could see each other
once in a while, just to say hi. He didn't really seem like a bad
person, just not as well bathed as she'd imagined.

"How'd you find me?" Chinchy asked.

"Jenny Shu trades this and that with me, couple times a year.
Supposed to shun me, but she doesn't. She said you been hunting up
this ridge the last week or so."

If he'd managed to have regular contact with Ms. Shu, he could have
done the same with Chinchy. Obviously the one was a necessity in his
eyes and the other a burden --- or maybe if she pressed him, he'd
offer some rationalization about not wanting to get her in trouble.

"I should get going," she said. The sun was close to the mountains.
"I've still got to haul this buck home tonight." She stood up and
walked toward the carcass. It was a good excuse to escape, because
her father couldn't go into the village. The way to handle it was
that they were just two people who hadn't talked in a long time, and
now they both had to go home. That would show that she was an adult
now, and she didn't need him.

"You never asked why I came here today," she heard him say from a
distance.

"So why did you?" she asked over her shoulder.

"I'm cashing out."

Cash was a kind of money, like the Sacagawea coin. "What?" She
squatted down and thought about whether to carry the buck some more
or drag it for a while.

"Transferring."

"Oh yeah?" She stood back up and looked him in the eye. He'd be
allowed to come back from exile for long enough to walk through the
village and get to the transfer point.

"Yeah, about time for it." He spread his hands. "You can see I'm wore
out."

"Mom ..."

"I don't think Carly wants to see me. After she transfers she's got
forever to come by and say hi if she wants." Her father walked up the
hill, sole flapping again, to where she was. He put a hand up to
shade his eyes. "And Ron, I'm grateful that he took care of you along
with his own kids. I was real sorry to hear when he got sick. Tell
you what, first thing I do after I transfer, I'll look him up and buy
him a virtual drink, or whatever you buy for an old friend when
you're in the Cloud. Him and Carly were meant to be together, not
like me and her. It's good you and me got to talk, because Ron's
going to want to know how everyone is."

They dragged the buck down the ridge together. Chinchy insisted on
going in front, so that he wouldn't be able to see in case she
stressed out too much and had trouble keeping her face under control.
She hauled on the short new velvet-covered antlers, while her father
supported some of the weight of the hindquarters using a sling made
from her rope that he slung over his shoulder.

They came down off of the ridge and into a canyon that was now shaded
from the sun, then met up with one of the Cloud's tentacles where it
wound its way up the bed of the creek. It had been a heavy snow year,
and there was more water flowing down along the side of the tendril
than it could suck up. Sometimes the pink roots spreading out from
the Cloud's center reminded Chinchy of tongues, but at this time of
year, tight with water, they made her think of tumescent penises. She
and her father followed the tube down as it grew from waist- to
chest-high, until they reached the edge of the area where the trees
had been cleared around the village. Annie Pansegrau was playing in
the young corn lilies. They put down the buck, and Chinchy sent Annie
to go and tell Chinchy's family to come and pick it up before bears
or coyotes found it.

"I don't know if you want to ..." Chinchy said, not knowing how to
end her sentence.

"I'm ready. Let's do it."

They scrambled up on top of the tentacle and started along it toward
the center, with her father in front. The strand joined with others,
rose and fattened, until they were high enough to see out over the
quaking tops of the aspens that grew along the river. The shadow of
the mountains was creeping out across the desolate sagebrush plain
beyond.

"You must have been some places," Chinchy said.

"Here and there."

"Everybody in the village is afraid to get too far from the transfer
point, because what if something happens?"

"Uh huh."

"Have you been to --- are there other villages, other Clouds?"

"Haven't gone searching for them. A sheep gets lost, I go after it. A
griz took out a ewe a few weeks back, and the flock scattered. You
know where the lake is that's shaped like a heart? Island in the
middle, stays froze up until May usually?"

"No. I go up to tree line. Game's not as good higher than that."

"The bear was what made me think about transferring. A grizzly will
eat a man, I guess. No point pushing my luck. The rest of the sheep
are still up there at that lake."

They got to the top, the huge, pink central bulge that was even
taller than the big Jeffrey pine by the railroad tracks. Her father
put his hands on his hips and looked down by his feet at the transfer
point's orifice, which was a circle a little smaller than a man's
head. The protective iris that covered it was translucent, but in the
dusk it was hard to see anything inside.

Her father slowly made a complete turn to take a last look around at
the world.

"All right, thanks, Chinchy, for coming here with me. I'm sorry about
... the body ---"

"It's all right. I don't mind."

"You've grown up into a fine woman." He put out a hand and they
shook. "Guess I'd better do it before I lose my nerve." Without
saying anything more, he walked over and lay down on his back with
his head on top of the iris. It was nothing like the usual ceremony.
No singing, no speeches, no blanket drawn over him. Instead of
closing his eyes, he shaded them with a hand.

The iris gradually started to open, the orifice widened a little, and
her father's head began to sink into the goop underneath. The hand
fell to one side, and his face slackened. People had always told her
it looked like going to sleep, but it didn't. It happened faster than
falling asleep, and his eyes stayed open. It was more like the way an
animal would sometimes just turn wooden after finding an arrow
through its heart.

The slime started to go into one corner of his mouth, creeping in
slowly so that it was hard to tell whether it was only flowing
downhill or consciously finding its way in. There was a hint of a gag
reflex, and after that his head slowly sank until it was completely
submerged.

***

Obviously striding across the earth in absolute freedom was a lot
less glamorous than Chinchy had imagined. She didn't tell anybody
right away about her father. There was always more time to tell
something if you wanted to, but once you told it you could never
i/un/-tell it, and almost certainly everyone would end up knowing.

And if she was going to tell someone about it, what would the point
of the story be? She hadn't thought it would be a big deal to go with
him to the transfer point and drag the body to the burn pit
afterward, but something about it did bother her. It wasn't the
physical part, which was less messy than dressing a deer. She wasn't
sad that she wouldn't be seeing him for a long time, since she'd
never had any real relationship with him. What was gnawing at her was
that it had forced her to think about her own transfer. Here in the
world outside the Cloud, she had a job and she knew how to do it. If
the little kids in the village only had acorns and camas bulbs to
eat, they'd get kwashiorkor and end up retarded. As far as anyone
could guess, that meant their minds would be that way forever in the
Cloud. Chinchy was proud that she did so much --- more than her
share! --- to keep that from happening to the kids.

But what would her job be in the Cloud? Her function here in the real
world was to kill things for people to eat. There wouldn't be any
need for that after she transferred. What reason would anyone have to
respect her, and what would make existence worthwhile? She'd spent
her life learning the ways of all the plants and animals that lived
in the hills. She understood them better than she knew her fellow
humans. What use would that be in a simulated world made out of ones
and zeroes sparking back and forth in a mountain of bioengineered
cells?

She finally felt ready to tell the story after sexing with Sophie on
the sand by the river. They were cuddled up with Chinchy's head on
Sophie's shoulder, as if Sophie was the mother bird and Chinchy the
chick. Chinchy was a head and a half taller than pixieish Sophie, but
somehow they always ended up in this ironic position.

"So he said the sheep were still up there at that lake, and then ---"

"Waitwaitwait," Sophie said. She propped herself up on one elbow,
which made Chinchy's head feel like it was going to slide off. "The
sheep are still there?"

"Yeah, and then we ---"

"Oh, baby." Sophie kissed Chinchy's forehead. "Does anyone else know?"

Chinchy sat up. "What?"

"Don't you see what a big deal it is?"

"You planning to go up in the mountains and be a hermit shepherd and
never get a bath? I like your smell, but not when it's that strong."
She wrinkled her nose. "We're both kind of stinky now. I'm going to
wash off again." She went to the water, dove in, and came back up,
shivering in the sun as the snowmelt sluiced off of her skin.

Sophie waded in up to her knees and splashed herself, but there was a
distant look in her eyes. "Seriously, this is major. Think about how
our society works."

"As opposed to all those other societies out there in the world?"
Chinchy waded to the shore and got dressed. She prepared herself to
listen indulgently to one of Sophie's lectures. Sophie had a lot of
time to spend with a know-it. Sophie's mother had transferred as soon
as her only child was off the breast, so Sophie didn't have any
younger brothers or sisters to take care of. She could read like
lightning, faster than a person could talk.

"Your father did exactly the opposite of what he would have been
smart to do." She joined Chinchy on the sand and pulled on the
fawnskin dress she looked so good in. "He's got these sheep, right?
So what does he do with them? He takes them and puts them somewhere
that people can't get at them. Well, obviously they see that as
hoarding."

"He admitted it was hoarding."

"What's hoarding and what isn't depends completely on how you present
it to people. I'm starved, are you? Let's head back." They walked
along the riverbank. "So all he has to do is, he just brings one
sheep down to town. They're tame, right? Totally docile. So he ties a
rope around it and just walks it down, and then they slaughter it and
have a feast and everybody loves him."

"Are sheep good to eat? I thought they were just for wool."

"The meat is called mutton. They eat it all the time in the Jane
Austen books. But of course you make a big show out of harvesting the
wool, too. Give it to some old widow, and there's a way she can ...
what's it called ..."

"Spin?"

"Right, like Sleeping Beauty. And you can make new blankets and
things, and every time someone uses their new wool blanket instead of
their ratty old blanket full of holes from before the Wig-Out,
they're saying to themselves, Thank you, Mark Herrera."

"So it's his fault, because he could have done the same thing but
made people think it was a different thing. You always act like
you're smarter than everyone. Maybe it's a good thing that my father
wasn't like you, all Machavellian."

"You mean Machiavellian."

"My ancestors had the same genemods as yours, Sophie. My brain just
hasn't had as much time as yours to practice multiplication and how
to pronounce `Machiavellian.'"

"Don't get upset, Chinchy. I was just explaining ---"

"Well, maybe you shouldn't have been explaining. Maybe you should
have been listening. I haven't told anyone else about this. I thought
I could tell you about it, and you'd listen and say, `there, there,'
and make me feel better. That's what I'd do if it was you telling me
your problems."

"But all I'm ---"

"Oh, just shut up, will you?"

***

The annoying thing was that Sophie was right. It really would be
smart to go and find the sheep. Chinchy spent some time thumb-tapping
on a know-it, but it gave her a headache. She understood the general
idea of a map. It was supposed to be what you would see if you were a
bird flying up in the sky, looking down at the land. There was
writing on it, too, which she could read, laboriously, or have the
know-it read out loud to her. But that didn't mean that it made
sense. i/Pacific Crest Trail. UTM GRID AND 2038 MAGNETIC NORTH
DECLINATION AT CENTER OF SHEET. Topography by aerial photographs and
multiplex methods. ONION VALLEY CAMPGROUND (SUMMER ONLY)./ Blue was
supposed to be water, green forest. But the old dams and aqueducts
had been cracked apart by the Cloud's tentacles, and the Owens Valley
was no longer sending its water to Los Angeles. And meanwhile the
Cloud had dried out some streambeds to quench its thirst, while
spitting out its reddish wastes in other places. Where the land had
been too wet and boggy for anything but onions and rushes, now it was
forested. What had been forest was a meadow now, or sterile granite
where the flow of waste had washed away the topsoil.

She needed some help. She decided to go see Gus Chen at the Snowcap
Diner on Thursday night. The villagers had turned the Snowcap into a
shrine for their best know-it. It was one of the few pre-Wig-Out
buildings that was still upright and weatherproof. Gus was just as
much of a know-it freak as Sophie, without rubbing anyone's nose in
it, and that was why he volunteered to babysit at the Snowcap
Tuesdays and Thursdays. The know-it at the Snowcap had a screen as
wide as Chinchy's forearm, and its brain was a lot faster than the
handheld models, so you could ask it more complicated questions and
it wouldn't take forever to answer. Gus was good at asking questions
the right way. After they figured out where the heart-shaped lake
was, they could go and tell Sophie together. Chinchy would apologize
to Sophie for her outburst, but she would have solved the problem
without Sophie's help, so Sophie could see that she wasn't the only
smart person in the world --- or in Bristlecone, which amounted to
the same thing.

On Thursday night, Sophie helped her sister Marcie get the youngest
kids washed up and ready for dinner. Chinchy told her mother she
wasn't hungry and she was going to the Snowcap. She ducked out under
the thatch into the gathering darkness and walked up Main Street past
the campfires. Jack Nguyen was dangling his short legs off the
tail-step of the rusted and skewed old Hino truck where his family
lived. He shyly waved an arm clad in baby fat, and Chinchy waved
back. Some of the venison had gone to the Nguyens.

At the Pines, lines of yellow light showed through the cracks in the
boards that covered the windows. Chinchy knocked perfunctorily and
went in. Gus and Sophie were both there, sharing the same torn-up
armchair and looking at a paper book. The chair was a tight fit.

"Hey, Gus. Sophie."

"Hi." --- "Hi, Chinchy."

The three of them had run wild together. There was no greater freedom
than knowing that your parents weren't really sure why they'd had
you, and didn't much care if you died, as long as you got dragged
back to the transfer point before your brain cells started to rot.
They chased chipmunks, climbed cliffs, and dug holes in the mud.
Sophie was sexfriends with both Gus and Chinchy, which they all
agreed was okay, because sexual jealousy was one of those things that
didn't make sense anymore. How could you mate for life, Sophie
argued, if you knew you were going to live forever? It occurred to
Chinchy, not for the first time, that Sophie's logic worked out
especially well for Sophie.

"What have you guys been reading?" Chinchy asked.

"Fantasic Four
\#66," Gus said, looking flustered. "You want us to clear out? The
caretaker is supposed to let users have privacy if they want." He
levered himself out of the deep crater in the seat of the old chair.
Regaining his usual irony, he said, "I guess we can wait 'til later
to find out" --- deep, ominous voice --- "i/What Lurks Behind the
Beehive/." Sophie stood up too, with more aplomb, and smoothed out
the denim mini-skirt that she'd patched with yellow hibiscus flowers
from an old beach towel.

"No, no," Chinchy said, imagining what would probably be next on Gus
and Sophie's agenda if they were forced to go out into the moonlight.
"The whole reason I came over here tonight was because I knew you'd
be here." She explained her purpose. "Looking at the maps on a
hand-held know-it is like squinting through a keyhole. And I feel
like I need to understand more about how the landscape has changed
since the Wig-Out. The Cloud's tentacles suck water and keep it from
flowing downhill where it used to, so the heart-shaped lake probably
wasn't a heart-shaped lake when the map was made. Most likely it was
deeper and bigger. Come on and help me figure out queries." She slid
into the booth in the corner where the know-it was set up, with its
wires running up through a hole in the plaster to the solar panels on
the roof. Sophie and Gus came and stood by the table.

Chinchy leaned over the mic. "Turn on, know-it."

"User: Chinchy Herrera," the voice said through the speaker. Hell,
she'd left her preferences set to voice, and now Gus and Sophie would
think she was an illiterate dummy. "Bookmarks," the voice went on.
"Why a flying arrow doesn't fall down ---"

"Stop. Switch to text output, but keep voice input, because I can't
type on this keyboard."

A window popped up on the screen. i/Bookmarks: Why a flying arrow
doesn't fall down. The Magic Flute. Llamas with hats. Are You There,
God? It's Me, Margaret. MORE.../

"Stop. I want to do a search. Let's start with places within fifty
miles of Bristlecone, California." If the sheep were farther than
that, it wouldn't be worth going after them.

i/Thirty-two million hits./

But almost all of those hits had to be from before the Wig-Out, when
there had been a network covering the whole world. "What year did
Vons in Bishop stop selling food?"

i/2066./

"Let's narrow the search to, uh, 2064 and later."

i/Seventeen thousand hits/

"Now I want to know about stuff up in the mountains."

i/Further narrowing your most recent search?/

"Right."

i/Eighty-seven hits./

"Give me a random one."

i/To whom it may concern: --- Why my landlady, Jenny Garcieres, is a
bitch. I am taking care of this place for my landlady, Jenny
Garcieres, and taking care of her chickens, too, and giving her half
the eggs, and all I get is this run-down shithole. Anymore, there is
no water or electricity or gas or nothing, and the sewer doesn't work
either, so I can't even use the toilet, and I want to know what I am
getting for all my work. I am at 137 Mountain Street, Bristlecone,
California, and anyone who ---/

"Stop." i/Mountain/ Street had matched the search.

"Suggestion, Chinchy?" Sophie asked. Gus was standing close behind
Sophie, and Chinchy's brain conjured an image of Gus's hands on
Sophie's hips, then the two of them down on the floor like that.

"Yeah?"

"They used to have rangers. They had uniforms, like soldiers, and
when people would go walking for fun in the mountains the rangers
would make sure they didn't get hurt, or start a fire, or whatever."

"Like police."

"Yeah, so they'd probably be the ones posting about how the water was
changing because of the Cloud."

"Yeah, good idea." She tried to think fast. She wanted to set up the
question herself. "Know-it?"

"Ready."

"New search, everything within fifty miles of Bristlecone, plus it
should be by a ranger or about a ranger, and I want you to sort it
backwards in time, so the ones that were posted last, you tell us
those first."

"A hundred and twenty thousand hits."

"Give us number one."

i/We haven't had net connectivity for a couple of weeks now. I don't
know if this will ever get saved permanently, or if it'll just sit in
our local-area net where nobody will ever see it./

i/Anyway I thought I should try, since John's family would want to
know what happened to him. I can't log in anywhere, but this is Julie
Grueter. I'm a ranger in Inyo National Forest. John Colasciuta was my
boss at the ranger station in Bristlecone. John thought it was wrong
for people to be rushing like lemmings to upload, just because life
was getting rougher and society was falling apart./

i/I think that's why it hit him so hard when his girlfriend Shizuko
transferred. They planted a new self-supporting biocomputer right
here in Bristlecone, out of town next to the river where it would
have plenty of water and sunlight. I guess it's like planting a tree,
you just don't want to plant them too close together. So because of
that Shizuko didn't even have to drive to the Bay Area. She left him
a note, said she looked forward to meeting him on the other side.
That ate at John, and eventually he decided to do the upload himself./

"Stop."

They spent hours trying to construct more elaborate queries, with no
success. Society had been cracking to pieces. Who cared about
hypothetical changes in the landscape that Bristlecone's Cloud might
someday cause? People had imagined the Cloud as a lifeboat, a
temporary way of preserving the consciousnesses of the people who
would otherwise have starved to death because farmers and truck
drivers had stopped doing their jobs.

Chinchy started a fire and made i/yerba santa/ tea, and then they
turned to the old maps. They scrolled back and forth, zoomed in and
out, but didn't find any heart-shaped lakes near Bristlecone. The
lakes they knew about were all smaller than on the maps, because the
Cloud used up so much water. The maps had contour lines that showed
altitude, so if there had been an empty heart-shaped valley, they
could have found it. But there were no contour lines within the
outlines of the lakes, just featureless blue to show where the
water's surface had been --- when it was higher.

The morning sun woke Chinchy as she lay curled up in the armchair.
Gus and Sophie were asleep on the couch together, his arm wrapped
protectively around her. Chinchy crept out of the diner with her
boots in her hands.

In the distance, at the end of Main Street, the big mound of the
Cloud was cold and mysterious in the morning shadows. If she couldn't
hold someone's love for a short time on earth, how much more lonely
would it be in the Cloud forever?

***

As spring went on and the snowline retreated, Chinchy started
exploring higher and higher in the mountains, and farther away from
Bristlecone. There wasn't any large game at the high altitudes, and
in any case she wouldn't have been able to drag it home from so far
away, but she set traps and got marmots, pikas, and squirrels. She
visited as many lakes as possible, and while she was there she fished
for trout. She wasn't bringing back enough food to feed four or five
families anymore, but it was enough to make sure her own family had
enough fat and protein.

She saw her life as the champion hunter in a new light now. It had
all been wasted effort. No, not just wasted but counterproductive.
Why work herself to death just so that people could feed more kids?
If Ron hadn't died, he and Mom would have still been having babies.
How long would it be until Sophie let Gus get her pregnant? What
would humanity become if everybody kept on cranking out kids and not
even trying to build civilization back up? They'd already lost
agriculture. Pretty soon the last know-it would break down, and
they'd lose all the old books and music. She imagined a fallen race,
living just long enough breed and then upload into the Cloud, where
they'd arrive howling and grunting. If Chinchy could bring a herd of
sheep to Bristlecone, she'd be doing something to stop the downward
slide.

She found the herd grazing in a little box canyon with sides so steep
that you couldn't see into it until you were about to fall in. There
was a creek running down it, with a Cloud-tentacle the size of her
arm that looked like it had been damaged by frost. It took her most
of the afternoon to struggle down through the thick chaparral, with
the animals peering up nervously at her. By the time she'd reached
the creek bed she was scratched and bleeding all over her arms, legs,
and face, and she suspected she'd have a horrible case of poison oak
the next morning.

She'd planned to tie a rope around a male and a female and lead them
home: a breeding pair, just like Noah's ark. Quickly she found out
that her plan wouldn't work. The sheep weren't shy, probably because
they'd gotten used to her father. But whenever she tried to separate
one from the rest, they all got upset and ran away. They had an
instinct to stay in a herd, and if they wanted to evade her, they
could, because they could move faster through the brush. In the end,
she managed to split the herd in half, driving one half down the
canyon. She spent a sleepless night in the foothills with her
captives, afraid that if she closed her eyes they would run off.

***

Chinchy was feted and praised for her accomplishment, and the
festivities involved slaughtering and barbecuing a ram. After all,
you only needed one ram for breeding, not all four. Adult sheep
started to disappear, and people said that was all right because the
lambs would grow up. Lambs disappeared, and that was a shame, but
everyone agreed that lamb was awfully tender and tasty. Eventually
all that was left was a lactating ewe and her one female lamb, and
that was a shame, wasn't it? So much for breeding. Everyone
disapproved of whoever it was who had eaten the last male.

"So much for your career as an agricultural innovator, Chinchy,"
Sophie said, as the three of them lay naked and sunning themselves on
a rock by the river.

"I'm going to guess what `innovator' means and agree with you,"
Chinchy said. In some ways it was easier to get along with Sophie now
that they weren't sexing.

"It's pretty inconsiderate of you to have let this happen," Gus said.
"People are saying you shouldn't have left half of them up there, or
wondering when you're going to go back up and bring the rest down."

"Oh, yeah? Well I've been thinking about it, and that's exactly what
I'm going to do, but this time I'm not going to leave them here in
town."

"They'll say you're hoarding," Sophie warned.

"They can say that if they want, but it'll be after I'm long gone."

"You're going to transfer?" Sophie asked, with real concern in her
voice.

"Nope. I'm heading for the other side of the mountains. Sacramento
River delta. It's the world's best farmland, and the river is so big
that no Cloud could ever suck it all away."

"I don't get it," Sophie said.

"I think I do," Gus said, and followed up with his Doctor-Doom evil
laugh.

"You'll die of thirst."

"No," Chinchy said. "The west side of the Sierra is pretty wet,
especially when you get up north. I'm going to go through Yosemite
Valley on my way out, see if it's as pretty as the pictures."

"You'll starve," Sophie insisted, being the densest one of the three
for once.

"Ba-a-a-a-a," Gus said.

***

Chinchy found spoor showing that the rest of the herd had headed up
the mountain, to where fresh grass was just beginning to peek out of
the snow. The next day, Sophie and Gus set out with her to bring the
sheep back.

"No, seriously, I think our god is dead," Gus said as the three of
them climbed toward tree line. Sophie was in the middle, and Chinchy,
the strongest, brought up the rear to make sure she wouldn't set too
fast a pace for the others. This, unfortunately, gave her a
nostalgia-inducing view of Sophie's cute little butt in her short
denim skirt with the flowers sewn on.

"Come on, Gus," Chinchy said, "the Cloud is as alive as a tree or a
blade of grass. I've seen its roots grow into new places that it
wasn't in when we were little." They had just stopped for lunch and
shared a pipe of dumbweed sitting right in the shade of a tentacle,
so Gus's outrageous statement struck her as kind of funny. It was as
if Gus, Chinchy, and Sophie had just had a visit with Grandpa, and
then Gus had said that there was no such thing as Grandpa.

"What I mean is, its body is alive, but its brain is dead. Anybody
i/ho-o-o-o-me/ in there? Nope, nobody here but us genemodded plant
cells."

"If you start a fire too close to it, it smells it and sprays that
stuff that puts it out," Sophie protested.

"Sunflowers twist around and follow the sun," Gus countered. "Doesn't
mean they know what they're doing."

"If I kick a dog, it growls or runs away," Chinchy said. "Is the dog
the same as a sunflower, maybe it does it without knowing what it's
doing?"

"Maybe it i/is/ the same," Sophie said. "Maybe Gus died yesterday,
and from now on whenever he has an audience he'll just knee-jerk the
same thing about how the Cloud is dead. Nobody home, pure reflex,
like my old great-auntie babbling about airplanes and the president
until she was a hundred and ten." Sophie, unlike Chinchy, had
remembered that satire was the only way to poke Gus.

"No, it's not the same thing," Gus said with self-assurance.
Obviously he'd thought about this a lot already. "Let's say you could
make a dog a million times smarter, so its brain worked a million
times faster."

"You don't even know what a million is," Chinchy said.

"Sure I do, it comes right after eleventy-seven. Some big number,
okay? Doesn't matter what number it's called. So that dog would be
smarter than a human, smarter than all the souls in the Cloud put
together, right?"

"I don't think a million would be enough," Chinchy said.

"What I'm saying is, if a million's not enough, just pick some bigger
number, okay? And say you make another dog super-super-slow, so it
takes all day to decide to scratch a flea. You've got these three
dogs, normal, fast, and slow, and you can tell the difference. One's
a god, and one's dumber than Chinchy."

"Chinchy can still kick your ass," Chinchy said.

Sophie said, "My auntie told me that after you transfer, if you're
rich you can make your stream of thought go fast, but if you're poor
they give you one second every year to think something."

Gus said, "Right, I heard that too, and that's what started me
thinking this way. But here's how you can tell that nobody inside the
Cloud is thinking anything at all. You can tell the difference
between a slow dog and a fast dog, and that's how you know a dog can
think. i/But what's the difference between a fast sunflower and a
slow sunflower?/ None. It does things on a one-day cycle because
that's the how long it takes the sun to go around the sky. The Cloud
is just like a sunflower. There's no difference between a fast Cloud
and a slow Cloud."

"No difference you can tell from the i/outside/," Chinchy objected.

The bull session threaded its way through calf-stabbing yucca and up
past the last pine trees, starved and wind-whipped into krummholzed
shapes frozen above the talus slope. The gradual dying out of the
trees was paralleled by the tapering of the Cloud's tendrils, until
finally the hiking party was in a landscape that could have made a
believable twentieth-century picture postcard. If Sophie's auntie was
right, then consciousness was a valuable commodity in the Cloud, like
the energy that flowed in the sap of a tree. That would be a good
reason for the tentacles to climb up into this barren place, trying
to fuel itself by sucking up every last drop of water and ray of sun.

Clouds were flowing from the south and west, drawing over them like a
blanket. "Might get some rain," Sophie said, and, as if on cue, a
faint roll of thunder came over the mountains. It was getting late in
the afternoon. They stopped to drink where a creek splashed into a
little granite-bottomed pool, and Chinchy couldn't help ogling Sophie
when she got down to drink. After Chinchy took her own drink, she saw
that Gus was rubbing his temples with his palms.

"You all right?" Chinchy asked while fishing a ratty pre-Wig-Out
cotton sweater out of her sack.

"Little headache."

"The altitude must be hitting you," Sophie said.

"It's not bad."

They resumed their climb, paralleling the creek, but Gus was slowing
down, and soon Chinchy was having to consciously moderate her tempo
to keep from stepping on Sophie's heels. There was more distant
thunder, and a light rain was starting to fall, but a
summer-afternoon shower in the Sierra was nothing to worry about. Gus
took a long time to work his way around a little waterfall, and
Chinchy took the opportunity to scan the barren, high-altitude
landscape, first by naked eye and then using the scope that she'd
removed from her bow. No sheep.

"Rock!" Sophie and Gus yelled at the same time. Chinchy took the
scope away from her eye and saw a half-meter boulder tumbling down
the slope from Gus's position. When they caught up with Gus, he was
nursing his ankle.

"Twist it?" Sophie asked.

Gus flexed his foot gingerly. "I'll be okay. God must be mad at me
because I know he doesn't exist."

The rain was falling harder, and the wind was coming up. Gus was
wearing a faded and grimy red windbreaker, and Sophie had produced a
wool sportcoat with corduroy patches on the elbows. Chinchy shucked
her own cotton sweater and stashed it back in her bag, because if it
got wet it would be useless for the rest of the trip. In the bag she
had a lightweight tarp, a pristine lucky find from the back seat of a
car she'd found two years before, half-full of mud at the bottom of a
gully. Wrapped up in the tarp were three sleeping bags, each cinched
up in a raggedy old trash compactor bag. The sleeping bags would at
least take off some of the chill, even though the insulation had
gotten wadded up into clumps over three or four generations of use.

"If we can find someplace that's flat and not so exposed, we can
pitch the tarp." Uncomfortably, she imagined sleeping huddled
together with Gus and Sophie. Who would go in the middle?

They started back up, following a ridge-line. Something pinged
Chinchy on the head, and she looked up reflexively to see where the
pinecone had come from. But of course there were no trees up here. It
had been a hailstone, not a pinecone. The stones, as wide as
Chinchy's pinkie, clattered on the rocks around them. Hail in July!

"Ow!" --- "Look at that stuff coming down!"

A searing flash strobed the darkening landscape, and then, with
almost no pause in between, came a crash that rattled their bellies
as much as their eardrums.

"Okay," Chinchy said, keeping her voice calm and authoritative, "that
was close. Let's keep moving and get through that gap up there, and
then we won't be the highest thing sticking up and attracting
lightning." A lightning strike could fry your brain like a duck egg.
There wouldn't be anything left to transfer.

Gus took off fast uphill, slipping and sliding on the hail-covered
rocks, falling down and picking himself up. The wind had picked up,
and the sleeves of his red windbreaker flapped like flags. Chinchy
wanted to tell him to pace himself, but there was another lightning
strike, right near her. After a while she realized that she wasn't
standing and needed to get up --- and then by the time she'd regained
her feet and shaken her head to clear it, Gus was too far above
Chinchy to hear her voice.

"You all right?" It was Sophie.

"Yeah, let's just keep moving."

The hike turned into a scramble. Chinchy concentrated on staying sure
of her hands and feet, testing rocks to see if they were solid before
she put her weight on them. It was still hailing, and the stones were
getting in her hair and inside her shirt. A lightning flash cast
light into a little crevice in front of her face, and she saw that
hail had sifted in and filled it up. She realized that she needed to
keep track of Gus, and decided to keep her eyes on where she thought
she was, so that when the next lightning flash came she could pick
him out.

Without warning, there was a bang, and the mountainside lifted itself
upward, leaving Chinchy behind. Something slapped her in the
shoulder, and then in the head.

***

"Chinchy?"

"What?"

"She's come around."

"I'm fine. What are you talking about?" Chinchy was cold and wet.

"Chinchy, that gap was a pass over the mountains. We need to get
down. You got a concussion and you fell in the creek. All the
sleeping bags are soaked. Can you walk?"

"'Course I can walk. Why is it so dark?"

"It's dark 'cause it's night-time, you dope," Gus's voice said. The
lack of creativity in the insult wasn't like Gus, and there was
something funny about his voice, a burbly sound like he was
underwater. "It's cloudy so we got no starlight."

"Gus ---"

"--- I'm just ---"

"--- let him ---"

"Shut up!" Chinchy yelled, and they did. She tried to sit up, but her
face hit something. The tarp. It was going fwuhp-fwuhp in the wind.
"Let me up."

Immediately she wished that she hadn't said that. Gus and Sophie had
been holding down the two windward corners with their hands,
shielding the three of them from the weather. The hail had turned to
freezing rain.

"All right," Chinchy said, "I'm ready. Sorry. Let's go."

"We don't know which way it is," Sophie said.

Chinchy was incredulous, and it took a while for Sophie to convince
her. There were two directions they could go down, and they didn't
know which was which. They had a compass, but it was too dark to read
the dial. Meanwhile she noticed that Gus wasn't saying much. She
grabbed one of Sophie's soggy corduroy elbow patches and pulled her
aside.

"What's up with Gus?"

"Altitude sickness. Besides the lightning, that's the other reason
we've got to get down."

"Is it that bad?"

"You heard his lungs. He keeps throwing up, and a lot of what he says
doesn't make sense. He kept falling down." She must have been scared
to death, with both Chinchy and Gus messed up, but she wouldn't show
it.

Distant lightning faintly lit up the pass for one instant. Chinchy
saw the two possible ways down, and Gus curled up in a ball. "Want me
to pick?" she asked Sophie softly.

"Might as well."

"You guys couldn't tell?" she said loudly. "It was that way." She
pointed randomly in one of the two directions --- not that anyone
would be able to see her arm or her finger.

Gus couldn't walk more than twenty or thirty steps on his own without
falling down, so Chinchy and Sophie had to put their arms around his
shoulders and hold him up.

There were times when not just Gus but all three of them fell down,
and those times got closer and closer together. Finally, one of these
times, Chinchy landed in a crevice between two rocks, and she felt an
irresistible urge to burrow into the rocks to stay warm.

***

Cold and darkness. She must be in the Cloud, and it was nothing but a
cold, dark emptiness that would last forever.

***

Chinchy's head was downslope from her body, her right cheek in water
and sunlight coming in through her eyelids. Reluctantly she opened
her eyes and saw that her face was lying in the shallow edge of a
puddle that was covered with a film of ice except where her body heat
had kept it thawed. She tried to get up, but found herself wedged in
place by a rock at her back and a human body pressed against her legs
and hips. When she dropped her chin against her chest and clenched
her teeth and turned her eyes as far down as they would go in their
orbits, she saw Gus's shoes and the top of Sophie's head. Sophie
stirred and groaned.

Gus had spent the night sandwiched between Chinchy and Sophie, which
was good because that would have kept him warm --- but Chinchy
realized guiltily that Sophie had been the one most exposed to the
wind. Chinchy and Sophie stood up, but Gus was a small man-sized rag
doll full of rocks. His head lolled, but his breath still wheezed in
and out of his chest. Chinchy and Sophie tried half a dozen ways of
carrying or dragging him before finally laying him on his back, head
down-slope, and dragging him by his arms. The sky was just starting
to lighten, and the narrow valley they were descending was still in
shadow.

The exertion warmed up Chinchy's blood, and her blood started to heat
her brain above the animal level. She almost tripped over a
finger-width pink tendril with its tip lying in an ice-covered mud
puddle. Sophie saw it too, and they laid Gus down gently.

"So we came down the right side?" Sophie asked.

Chinchy shook her head and tried to think logically. "Which way's the
sun?"

They staggered around like two meshed gears, squinting at the narrow
strip of overcast sky.

"I think it's brighter on that side," Sophie said. "The sun's over
that ridge." She pointed to the side on their right and then clasped
her arms around herself again for warmth.

Chinchy tried to figure out what that meant. At the moment she didn't
feel smart enough to count to ten. "So we're headed north? That
doesn't make sense. The tentacle should be coming up from the east."

"We must be going down a different way than we came up."

"But as long as we follow the tentacle, it'll take us home for sure.
After a while it'll turn to the right, maybe after we get out of this
valley."

"I guess that's right," Sophie said uncertainly. "I hope it didn't
get up here by growing straight up a cliff or something."

It started to snow, and they couldn't see very far. They followed the
sickly-looking tentacle, which was covered with scabs and scars. This
valley must have been at the very highest altitude where it could
survive over a winter.

The tentacle joined up with another one and fattened to the diameter
of an arm, and then it started to veer to the left.

Not to the right.

When they put Gus down so they could rest, Chinchy checked the
compass and silently showed it to Sophie. They were headed downhill
to the west now. They'd crossed over to the other side of the crest
of the Sierra.

"Shit," was all Sophie said.

There was no other choice but to follow the tentacle downhill. Late
in the afternoon it met up with the remains of a narrow dirt road and
continued downhill, hugging an eroded groove in the dirt. As they
descended, the tentacle got fatter and healthier, the air got warmer,
and stunted trees started to appear. The road became more well
defined, the trees got bigger, and then the road turned into
crumbled-up asphalt with yuccas growing out of it. The snow turned to
rain.

As it was getting dark, they came to a tent cabin with a fallen pine
tree lying on top of it that had torn half of the roof to shreds
while leaving the other half intact. They dragged Gus across the
threshold and over against the wall on the dry side, then slumped
down, exhausted, next to him.

***

They had a fitful night's sleep, bundled up in the tarp with Gus in
the middle of the sandwich again. His breath was mostly shallow, but
once in a while he would wake Chinchy and Sophie by taking a deep,
shuddering gasp. Whatever the altitude had done to him, he didn't
seem to be getting over it. Would he get better if they brought him
down low enough?

Chinchy was the first to wake in the morning. The rain had stopped.
She took a thorough look around the cabin, and what she found
disturbed her. There was an ax with a carbon-composite handle and a
well-sharpened stainless steel blade. Why hadn't such a valuable
artifact been found and salvaged before Chinchy was born? Mixed in
with the dirt and leaves and useless junk were three or four other
items that should have been scarce and prized, including two
still-sealed bottles of wine and a set of four wine glasses, three of
them perfectly preserved. The cabin wasn't hidden. It was right next
to a road. Someone should have found and looted it a long time ago.

She went out with her knife to see if she could find a chipmunk or a
marmot, but only managed to stuff her pockets with miner's lettuce.
As she came near the cabin, she heard Sophie's voice singing an opera
aria. She remembered when she and Sophie spent an evening together on
the roof of the Pines Diner listening to the know-it play back the
Vienna Philharmonic's performance of i/The Marriage of Figaro/, with
pauses for plot summaries and English translations. (Gus liked jazz
and blues and rock and roll, not opera.) The men would kiss the
women's arms and sing about how sexy they were. Afterward, Sophie
could effortlessly sing back every number. (If that was a genemodded
talent, it was one that hadn't found its way into Chinchy's
chromosomes.)

She sat on a rock for a few minutes and allowed herself the luxury of
listening to the beautiful sound. Sophie sang a slow, sad number,
then a lively one. Finally Chinchy got up, walked a hundred paces
away from the cabin, turned around, and approached it again, this
time without using her hunter's skill of stepping quietly. The
singing stopped before she got to the door.

"Hey, Sophie. Sorry, hope you weren't worried about where I was. I
figured you guys both needed the rest."

"No, that's all right." She was fussing with the tarp, which was
tucked around Gus. She'd hung the three wet sleeping bags up on the
wall to dry. "He's still breathing, but that's about it."

"We just need to get him down lower."

"He's a lot lower already." Were those tear-tracks on her cheeks?

"Do you think he can drink?" Chinchy asked. "I could take one of
those wine glasses and fetch some water."

"We shouldn't dick around. He needs to transfer."

Chinchy tried to focus on the fact that Gus was one of her two best
friends, but she couldn't keep another thought from scratching at the
door of her skull. Things might be different between her and Sophie
if Gus transferred --- and Gus would be safe and happy in digital
paradise, no harm done.

"If he can drink, he should," Chinchy said.

"Yeah, sure, but that's not the main point."

Chinchy tried to put her own feelings aside and think about what Gus
would want. "Well, it kind of i/is/ the main point. He thinks there's
nothing after you transfer. It's stupid, but that's what he thinks.
If you buy that, then all that matters is making him have the best
chance of coming alive again in i/this/ world."

"Gus says all kinds of nonsense he doesn't believe. Everything's a
joke for him."

"So you're saying just transfer him, even if it's not what he said
he'd want?"

"No, I'm ..." Sophie turned toward the cracked plastic window so
Chinchy couldn't see her face.

"What?"

"If we transfer him ..." Her shoulders were shaking. Chinchy wanted
to hold her and comfort her, but she couldn't do it.

"If we transfer him, what?"

She turned around, and tears were streaming down her face. "If we
transfer him, I'll never see him again!"

"But --- of course you will --- someday --- "

"No, because we have to transfer him in i/this/ Cloud, and I'll be in
the other one." She ran out the door and into the forest.

***

i/Cedar Canyon, CA. Population 270. Elevation 2900 m./

The entire post office, along with part of the adjoining Ski 'n'
Climb Mountain shop, had been tipped onto its side by the tumefying
pink center of the Cloud's root-ball. There was a broken-up skeleton
of a dog or a coyote in the street, but no human remains so far. At
the post-office door, Sophie tilted her head sideways and laboriously
read a notice that had almost faded into illegibility.

"It says even though ... tra ... transportation is wiped out,
everybody should just stay calm. You can transfer here, because
they've got their own self-supporting ... biocomputer as a lifeboat,
or you can try to hike out and transfer in Vi-sa-li-a. If you upload
to the lifeboat, your consciousness will go really slow, so you'll
barely even notice that time has been passing while you wait for all
the lifeboats to get linked up to the net... network. After that your
consciousness will get uploaded to the operation center at Yucca
Mountain, and you'll start thinking at full speed again. It'll be
like going to sleep and then waking up again."

They dragged Gus to the apex of the root ball, where a human neckbone
was sticking out of the orifice that had swallowed the skull.

"Son of a bitch," Sophie said, and looked away.

Chinchy's brain initially put it in the same category as the carcass
of one of the many animals she'd killed and butchered for food. It
was hard to see it as the used-up shell of a human being who was
still alive, somewhere in this other Cloud. She couldn't tell if it
was a man or a woman. Would that person care that crows had picked at
the flesh he no longer had any use for?

"They all went in," Chinchy said. "Every single one."

Sophie turned around. "I guess if you're the last one, there's nobody
left to drag your body to the burn-pit."

"Maybe our town is the only one that isn't normal. Pretty stupid,
right? Why fuck around and have babies when all you have to do is go
to sleep and wake up, and all your troubles are gone."

"Just a nice little nap." Sophie folded her arms and didn't look up
at Chinchy.

"Well, I guess we better do it." Would it be safe to pull the skull
out? She'd had to pop her father's head out, but it had been smooth
and covered with flesh. A skull would have sharp corners. Was there a
risk of tearing the iris? Maybe it would be safer to cut the neck
bones apart. After all these years the joints were probably barely
hanging by a thread. She should find an excuse so Sophie didn't have
to see her do it.

"No," Sophie said.

"What do you mean, `no'?"

"It's Pascal's wager. Gus told me about it."

"Yeah?"

"There were two philosophers called Blaise Pascal and Terry
Pratchett, and they got in a bet. I forget which one took which side.
The point is that if you're risking your chance of living forever,
you have to bet whichever way you think has the bigger chance of
letting you live forever, because nothing else matters."

"Uh huh?" Chinchy looked down at Gus, whose tongue was sticking out
of the corner of his mouth, and tried to imagine him having this big
philosophical conversation with Chinchy. Chinchy and Sophie had i/The
Marriage of Figaro/, and Gus and Sophie had Pascal's wager. Go figure.

"So this Cloud is just a lifeboat, and so is our own Cloud back in
Bristlecone. They were supposed to hook up with the mother-ship in..."

"Yucca Mountain."

"Right, but obviously that's not going to happen."

"How do you know?"

"Because obviously they screwed up, that's how. They thought these
were going to be i/lifeboats/." She spit the word out like a
sunflower seed. "They weren't supposed to last for year after year,
and they i/won't/ last for year after year. Maybe a hundred years go
by, or a thousand, and then these Clouds gets sick. Some kind of mold
starts growing on them, or an animal evolves that can eat them, or
whatever. The thing is, these two Clouds can't get over high
mountains. If they try to grow over high mountains, they die back in
the winter."

"You don't know that for sure. We don't even know where Yucca
Mountain is. Maybe you can get there without going over mountains."
Chinchy picked Gus up by the collar of his shirt and started dragging
him toward the orifice.

"Right," Sophie said, "but you never know anything for sure. That's
the whole point of Pratchett's wager."

"Pacal's."

"Whatever. Put him down, will you?" She got between Chinchy and the
orifice and pushed her away from Gus. Chinchy staggered and fell on
her ass, barely saving herself from an uncontrolled slide down the
side of the tentacle. "Will you just listen?" Sophie said. "So the
thing is, these two Clouds have a pretty crappy chance of surviving
forever. But if Gus wakes back up, maybe he heals up, finds out where
Yucca Mountain is. He goes there, uploads, lives forever."

"I've never heard of Yucca Mountain. It's got to be really far away."

"Yeah, but Gus has at least some chance of getting there before his
body dies. It's probably a bigger chance than the Cloud has of
stretching a tendril all the way out to Yucca Mountain. And then he
gets to eat chocolate."

"What's chocolate?"

"It's something you eat, the best thing to eat that there ever was.
They used to have it in the real world, and they can make a digital
kind in the Cloud."

Chinchy thought about it. "But you're assuming the two Clouds just
sit there while mold grows on them, or mutated futuristic chipmunks
take bites. The Clouds are smart, they've got smart people inside.
They can react to what's going on."

"That's what I would have thought. But look at that skeleton."

"What about it?"

"If you were dead, would you want your body to sit there rotting like
that, with maggots and worms eating it? I sure wouldn't. I'd say,
`Yo, Cloud-buddies, could you please deal with the outside world
enough to do something with my carcass? Swallow it down, or smoosh it
under a tendril, or i/something/? It hurts my feelings to know that
my old self is out there rotting and smelling bad.'"

***

Gus couldn't take water. When they laid him on his back and poured a
sip into his mouth, he started to choke horrifyingly. His skin became
like paper, and his eyes sank into their sockets. Sophie and Chinchy
kept him out of the sun and weather, made sure he was warm at night,
and steadily dribbled as much water into his mouth as they could
without making him gag.

On the morning of the third day Gus's breathing stopped and his
heartbeat faded away. They transferred him into the foreign Cloud and
climbed back over the pass to Bristlecone. The next day, without
warning anyone, Sophie transferred.

***

Chinchy found the sheep a few weeks later and drove them down to
lower elevation where she could keep an eye on them. It was autumn
now, much too late in the year to start her trek to the Sacramento
Delta. Word got around about the other Cloud where every soul had
transferred without leaving anyone behind. There was a rash of
transfers as some people in Bristlecone decided that the people in
Cedar Canyon had it right: why i/should/ anyone spend another cold
winter on earth?

It was a light snow year. Spring came early, and the snow began to
melt. Chinchy was out hunting one day when she came across the
tentacle that reached up along the route they'd taken last summer on
the ill-fated hike. But now the tentacle was huge. It had fattened up
so much that she could only climb up onto its back by dragging a log
up to it to use as a ladder. She traced the pink track upward with
her scope toward the pass they had discovered. She camped on the
tentacle's lee side that night and in the morning she followed it
upward. Its tip was almost to the pass --- much higher than she'd
ever seen a tentacle grow before, higher than it could possibly
overwinter.

She climbed up to the pass, and at the saddle she found another pink
tentacle growing up from the western side.
