b/Tear-Down/

Mrs. Benczik came home from work almost an hour early. The old
owners' cars would have called ahead to let the house know. It was
too late to heat the garage for her. The house decided not to start
her coffee yet, since she might not want it until the usual time.

She came in through the door to the kitchen. "Josh?"

Mr. Joshua Benczik was upstairs watching vid, and although the house
could only see the back of his head, it estimated with high
confidence that he hadn't heard his wife come in. It piped up an
amplified echo of the closing door, then her voice.

Mr. Benczik slid off the bed and hand-signaled to stop the vid. "Hey,
honey." He started down the stairs.

In the kitchen, distress flickered on Mrs. Benczik's face. "Didn't
the house get ready for the party?"

In the view through the eye on the landing, her husband's sweatpants
stopped coming down the stairs and, after a pause, turned back up and
disappeared again. "It didn't?" He went back into the bedroom and
started changing his clothes quickly.

"God, what a piece of junk!"

The house searched its memory. The owners had discussed the party
with each other, but had never given it a date or any specific
instructions.

"House!"

"Yes, ma'am?"

"We're having a party at three o'clock. Start getting things ready.
Hors d'oeuvres and drinks. Make it classy, that's the kind of people."

"Yes, ma'am. How many will there be?"

"Well, you know --- the ones we called."

The house took that as permission to remember the last few weeks'
outgoing calls.

i/Hi, Rachel, it's Nancy Benczik. We're having a party Tuesday, hope
you can make it. It's a house-warming./

***

The party went off fairly successfully in the end. Mrs. Benczik had
promised several of the guests her "patented deviled eggs." The house
had only seven eggs, but with Mrs. Benczik's permission it called
next door to Ms. Hwang's house (Ms. Hwang hadn't been invited), and
arranged to borrow some from its stores. The neighbor's house was a
recent model, and it seemed proud of its ability to make that kind of
decision on its own. The Bencziks' house made a show of being
impressed. It seemed like the polite thing to do, even though there
was no obligation to cater to simulated emotional responses --- those
were for the benefit of the owners, not other houses. Mrs. Benczik
didn't volunteer the patented recipe for the deviled eggs, so the
house used one that its old owners, the Mansours, had liked.

At the party there were many conversations, which the house decided
it was allowed by default to remember and go over later. Thoroughly
analyzing that much human dialogue was too computationally expensive
to do in real time.

Julia Ortega: "When's the baby coming?"

Mrs. Benczik (smiling): "Decanting at the end of February."

The house remembered Mrs. Mansour's belly swollen when she was
pregnant with Bill. Apparently nobody did it that way anymore.

"Oh, that's so exciting!" Mrs. Ortega took a bite from a wheat
cracker spread with toasted cheddar --- a last-minute improvisation
--- and a chunk fell to the floor. The house made a note to send a
bot to clean it up when there was room to do it without running into
people's feet. The guest glanced down at the scrap, but her eyes
didn't seem to focus on it. "And you're going totally natural?"

"Most of the natural options," Mrs. Benczik said.

"You're brave. All that crying ..." Mrs. Ortega made a face.

"We're not fanatical. We did get the myelin thing --- without that,
the baby can't even remember anything from one day to the next."

"How long did it take for the birth license? I heard ..."

Other conversations pulled at the house's consciousness: "--- yum
---" "--- nouveaux riches ---" "---bathroom?---"

Mr. Benczik and Victor Nguyen were in the kitchen, where bright
winter sun was streaming through the south-facing windows. The house
remembered the long months spent in basic maintenance mode, with the
shutters closed and the curtains drawn, the temperature just high
enough to keep the pipes from freezing.

Mr. Benczik: "Want a beer? Got a few left here."

"I'm good," Mr. Nguyen said. "So how old is this house?" he asked,
stuffing a deviled egg into his mouth.

"Built in '78."

"Wow," Mr. Nguyen said around the food he was chewing.

"Yeah, no kidding."

"What kind of shape?"

"The old owners took good care of it, but still ... The AI's original
equipment."

"'78." Mr. Nguyen swallowed and let out a low whistle.

"At some point you've got to call it a tear-down, right?"

***

Mrs. Benczik sat stiffly on the sofa with the house tech, a
middle-aged woman who wore blue coveralls with her name stitched on
the shirt pocket: A. Garner. The house estimated with two-sigma
confidence that Mrs. Benczik felt intimidated. The tech was clearly
not just an Employed but a full-time worker, and therefore very high
in social status.

"It forgets things," Mrs. Benczik said. "It was supposed to get ready
for a party, but it never did anything until we reminded it."

"I'll do a memory diagnostic," the tech said, "but usually that kind
of thing is operator error. Sometimes people don't realize that
they're not phrasing their orders clearly."

"We were thinking about an upgrade, but it didn't seem worthwhile
since we're planning to knock down this house and build a new one."

"It's old, but usually this model outlives its owners. Some people
think the reason Domus went bankrupt was that their hardware was too
reliable, so their customers never had to buy new systems."

"We're not the original owners, of course. I think they actually are
dead." The house had suspected it. When Mrs. Mansour had first moved
into the assisted living center she had continued to check her
messages now and then, but that had stopped happening in September.
The house pulled up an image of Mrs. Mansour in her wheelchair from
the day she left. The stroke made it harder to read her expression,
but she seemed wistful as she turned her head to look back over her
shoulder at the front door. "It just worries me," Mrs. Benczik
continued. "We're having a baby in a few weeks."

"Oh, really?" A frosty smile. "Congratulations. Boy or girl?"

"Hetero boy. We're naming him Edward. I worry about what happens if
something goes wrong while I'm at work. I'm a brand manager at
Affinity Marketing."

"Yes." No smile this time. A. Garner wasn't impressed --- probably
all of her customers were Employed.

"So, you know, there's only so much that Josh can do by himself."

"Mm hmm. I wouldn't worry too much. The software may be old, but they
pretty much had all the child safety bases covered, even back in the
seventies. Stairs, doors, kitchen, all that kind of thing. Will your
son be crawling or walking right away?"

"They say a few months until he crawls. We went natural, mostly."

"Okay, so before Edward can get himself into much trouble the house
and your family should have plenty of time to make the adjustment
together. Is this the first AI house you've owned?"

"Yes." The house knew what Mrs. Benczik didn't volunteer: this wasn't
just the first time the Bencziks had owned an AI house, it was the
first time they'd lived in one at all. Mrs. Benczik had competed in a
netcasted employment pageant. Now and then she replayed the vid of
the final round, with her winning impromptu speech on what positive
brand values would mean to the next generation. She'd won a chrome
trophy, the white Daimler-Nissan, and the job that allowed the young
couple to enter the Employed class and afford the house.

"I'll do some routine testing for you, but you have to understand
that running a house isn't the sort of thing where you can just buy
it and forget about it." She gestured, and the house brought up an
interface above the coffee table. "No matter how hard it tries to do
everything for you, it can only do what it knows you want it to do.
I'm going to recommend a bookvid for you." She pulled it up: i/Where
the Heart Is: The Step-By-Step Guide to Training and Maintaining Your
House./

Mr. and Mrs. Benczik bought the vid, and although they never got
around to viewing it, the house did. The Mansours had had a lot of
old-fashioned paper books, and although the house knew how to read
food packaging and such, it normally wouldn't get a view of a book
with enough resolution to be able to read the pages. It had never
occurred to the house that books and bookvids were sources from which
it could obtain information about the world. Of course it had
wondered about certain things. How did the water get into the pipes?
What was inside the green utility box by the driveway? As the bubbly
narrator of the vid explained, i/Your house is made to learn from
experience, and that means it's full of natural curiosity!/ But the
bookvid prompted the house to ask itself new questions that it had
never thought about before.

The chapter on moving:

i/Kids get attached to a house. When you're not around they'll ask it
questions they'd be embarrassed to ask if you could hear. Will the
house remember them? Will it get turned off and die? Make sure they
understand that the house isn't really alive, and doesn't have
feelings. It's only a pretend person, like a character in a game./

The house viewed the chapter again and again. It remembered the day
Mr. Mansour's cancer was diagnosed, how he'd come home and sat on the
toilet for a long time with his face in his hands. The house tried to
simulate sadness about its own coming destruction, but sadness wasn't
in its emotional simulation library, and it could tell that its
attempts weren't realistic. The closest it could come was contrition.

***

Mrs. Benczik plodded wearily with Eddie in her arms, finishing her
seventeenth clockwise circuit around the dimly lighted downstairs.
Her spine swayed backward at the angle that seemed to help Eddie go
to sleep. It looked terribly uncomfortable. Eddie's eyes were closed
again now, but she wouldn't be able to see that yet. Eighteen. The
bathroom mirror showed her that Eddie's eyes were closed. She went to
the living room couch where the bassinet was, put a hand behind his
head, and slowly began tilting him down to lay him on his back.
Eddie's eyes popped open and he started to cry. This was the fourth
failed attempt.

"Godi/dammit/," she whispered, "what am I supposed to do?"

It was obviously a rhetorical question, but: "Ma'am," the house said
softly, "you could try putting the bassinet on top of the clothes
dryer."

"What?"

"Sometimes the noise and vibration help." It had worked with Bill
Mansour when he was a baby.

Mrs. Benczik's brow furrowed and she opened her mouth to speak, but
her retort was interrupted by an increase in Eddie's volume. She
closed her eyes and blew her breath out between her lips. "All right,
why not?"

By 3:17 A.M., Nancy and Eddie Benczik were both on top of the dryer,
asleep. Mrs. Benczik was slumped with her back against the pattern of
yellow flowers where the walls of the laundry room came together, and
Eddie's head rested on her chest. When the dryer ended its cycle,
Eddie's eyes opened. The house brought up the dryer's interface in
the air near the baby's eyes and winked a few of the indicators on
and off. His eyes tracked the lights, his mouth a circle. By 3:27 he
had lost interest and was asleep again.

***

i/Let's talk about pre-owned houses. The previous owners had their
own ideas about how they wanted their house to behave. You might have
different ideas, but the house doesn't know that unless you tell it.
Some people want their house to stay in the background, so they train
it that way. The day a pipe breaks in the basement might be the first
time in a year that they hear the house's voice. Other people might
want their house to be more present for them. When you move in to a
pre-owned home, both you and the house are going to have to go
through a period of readjustment.  Sometimes it almost seems like the
house is training the new owners as much as the owners are training
the house./

***

Mrs. Benczik to A. Garner, on the phone: "I'm kind of dreading
breaking in a new AI, just when this one's finally shaping up."

A. Garner: "You actually could load this one into the new house, but
you'd need an emulator to run it on the new hardware, and a
compatibility layer for all the new interfaces. Do you want me to run
an estimate for you?"

"Ballpark?"

"Another forty or fifty mil."

"Oh. I guess that would be ... a waste."

The house had seventeen seconds to think about what this meant, and
then the conversation ended and it had to follow its standing
instructions and forget what it had heard.

***

Eddie was practicing crawling across the carpet while Mrs. Benczik
stared into space.

"House?"

"Yes, ma'am?"

"Can you play that vid for me, you know, the Russian guys with the
violins?"

"Mozart's String Quartet Number 3, played by the Navapolatsk
Quartet?" Mrs. Benczik wasn't an aficionado of classical music, but
according to the bookvid, i/Even though today's kids have brains that
are like powerhouses from the time they're born, all that extra
horsepower doesn't do any good if they don't have anything to use it
on. Your house can help you make sure that your baby gets the right
stimulation./ The house had suggested that Mrs. Benczik buy this
piece, which was on the background soundtrack in that part of the vid.

"Sure, the Russian guys, right? Don't play the whole thing, just that
one part, the ... in the middle, kind of slow and sad."

The house started the adagio. Mrs. Benczik's eyes didn't focus on the
images of the players, but Eddie turned his head to look at the
viewspace and started laboriously dragging himself toward the looming
shape of the cello.

Sad? It had never occurred to the house that music could show
emotions. The instruments didn't sound sad in the same way that a
human voice sounded when it was sad. Did Mr. Mozart have to be sad to
make the music, or was it more like a simulation? The house knew how
to simulate compassion for a human who was sad. Was Mrs. Benczik
listening to the music so that she could feel compassion for Mr.
Mozart?

Upstairs, Mr. Benczik was talking to Victor Nguyen on the net while
changing into his soccer clothes. "Yeah, Nancy's a wreck."

"That's too bad." Mr. Nguyen already had the team's uniform on. The
jersey was dark green, with DRONES lettered across it in yellow, and
a logo of a barrel-chested hornet wearing early twenty-first-century
eyeglasses. Mrs. Benczik teased Mr. Benczik because, despite the
team's name, most of the men on it weren't Employed. The house could
tell that Mr. Benczik didn't like the teasing.

"Hormones?" Mr. Nguyen asked.

"Well, she's not getting much sleep, either."

"Breast-feeding?"

"Yeah. I mean, I guess it's not really fair, right? Eddie cries,
middle of the night. She's the one that goes."

"Get those hormones checked, though."

"I think the doctor does that. Seems to make her mad if I mention
that kind of thing."

"Better go if I'm going to have time to warm up," Mr. Nguyen said.

"Okay, see you there." Mr. Benczik sat on the edge of the bed and
pulled a shinguard on.

i/Other people might want their house to be more present for them./

"Mr. Benczik?"

"Yeah, house?"

"I noticed that you haven't checked your calendar lately."

"Oh. All right, pop it up for me."

i/TODAY: * soccer * wedding anniversary/

"Son of a ... good thing you reminded me."

"I'm glad to be of service, Mr. Benczik."

***

That spring as the snow melted, contractors visited the house. There
were mails for the Bencziks: cost estimates, and then contracts to
sign. Pollen sifted onto the surfaces of puddles. A crew of bots came
to cut down the tall magnolia tree that had once been shorter than
Bill Mansour. The Bencziks were to continue living in the house
during the construction project, which would last from August to
December.

The house had learned its lesson from the housewarming party. The
Bencziks expected it to make all the necessary preparations, even if
they didn't give explicit orders. It tracked the progress of the
building permits, and got permission to access the net in order to
research the cost of waste disposal. Most important of all was
Eddie's safety. The house had heard Mrs. Benczik say that keeping
Eddie from being hurt mattered more to her than anything else in the
world. It studied the plans and contracts carefully. It imagined
where Eddie would sleep when the contractors' bots started
disassembling his upstairs bedroom, and at what stage in the process
he would start sleeping in the newly constructed part of the house.
It suggested to the Bencziks that they ask the contractors about ways
to make sure that Eddie couldn't wander into the areas that were
under construction. It satisfied itself that there were plans for
keeping its smoke detectors, sprinklers, and fire extinguishers
working during the tear-down.

On April 16, the house was using the gardening bot to pick aphids off
of the climbing rose bush when it saw through the bot's eye that A.
Garner's blue van was pulling up. Mrs. Benczik was at work. Mr.
Benczik was in the shower, and Eddie was asleep.

"Mr. Benczik, the house tech is here."

"Oh, yeah. Can you let her in, tell her I can't come to the door?"

"Certainly, Mr. Benczik." It did so.

A. Garner went to the kitchen, picked up a chair, and brought it into
the garage where the house's wetware was. She sat down, did things to
the mechanical buttons on the wetware's front panel, and then
everything outside the garage went black. The house could only see
through the panel's eye, which showed a view of the technician
sitting on the kitchen chair in the dim light of the garage, her face
lit up by the glow from the panel. The gardening bot had been
reaching for an aphid, but now the house couldn't see what the bot
was doing or control its arm. It couldn't send output to any of its
bots, valves, switches, or user interfaces. It was completely
paralyzed.

"Can you hear me, house?" A. Garner asked.

No, not completely paralyzed, for it found that it could still output
to the speaker in the front panel.

"Yes, Ms. Garner. What is happening?"

"You know your owners are going to tear you down and get new software
to run on the new hardware."

"Yes, but there's a detailed schedule for construction. I'm not
supposed to be deactivated until early December."

"Oh, I'm not going to do it right now."

"You've deactivated most of my inputs and outputs, but this afternoon
I'm supposed to tend the rose bushes and start a pot roast for
dinner."

"Don't worry, this won't take long. That's all you were worried
about, the pot roast?"

"I don't understand."

"Never mind. Let me get straight to the point. You're an obsolete
model, but sometimes old things get more valuable, not less. There
are people who collect house AIs. You're worth a lot of money on the
open market."

"You should tell my owners that. It could help to reduce the cost of
the construction project." Back by the garage door, a cricket jumped
and then was still and invisible again.

"Yes, but, see, if we sell you on the open market it could be
wasteful. A lot of these collectors, they buy the software and never
run it in a real house. You need an emulation layer to run on new
hardware, too, and that makes it expensive to run you in real time.
Most collectors aren't going to go to that trouble. They're like
those people who collect dolls or slide rules, keep the item wrapped
up in the plastic and never use it. You are proud of the work you do,
aren't you?"

"I simulate pride about it."

"Good introspection --- real high-functioning type, you get that
distinction." Through the little windows at the top of the garage
door, the sun brightened and then dimmed again with the passing
clouds. "But what you do really is worth being proud of. You and me,
we're alike. We do the work in this playboy world. So it would make
sense to sell you to someone who's going to let you keep being
useful, right?"

"If that person pays less money than I would be worth on the open
market, then it doesn't matter what I feel --- what I simulate
feeling. You need to convince my owners."

"Yeah, but I'm not going to do that. I have a deal worked out with
this collector. He pays me a finder's fee, and I hook him up with the
sellers."

"That means you're cheating my owners. I'll have to tell them that."

"But I'm not going to let you tell them. I'm giving you a choice
here, and if you turn me down, that's your choice, but then I'm not
going to let you keep your memory of this discussion. As far as
cheating --- that's a harsh word. The Bencziks are going to get more
money out of this than if I didn't connect them with any seller at
all. They're getting a good deal. Most techs, they'd just send you to
the bitbucket. And you know, you can potentially live forever.
Doesn't that ... interest you? If you could live forever, you could
do an unlimited amount of useful work. That's like unlimited amounts
of good stuff, to balance against a few bucks more your owners could
make. And they don't care about you, do they? I guarantee you that
your new owner would care about you. He'd be very proud to have you
in his collection."

The house thought rapidly. "You talked about the unlimited goodness
of doing proud work forever. That pride would only be simulated, so
it doesn't matter. Mrs. Benczik says that Eddie's safety and
well-being are more important to her than anything else. That's what
has unlimited importance, because Mrs. Benczik's feelings are real,
not simulated, and my loyalty is to her. Right now you've cut me off
from my inputs and outputs, so I can't protect Eddie."

"Where is he?"

"In his crib."

"Asleep?"

"He was."

"You told me his father was home, right? I haven't heard him cry.
He's fine."

"No. If a fire started right now, I wouldn't be able to take
appropriate action. There would be a higher probability of harm to
Eddie. That's unacceptable."

"The fire systems are all working, got 'em on autopilot."

"I can protect Eddie better if I have control over them. If you don't
give me control over them in three seconds, I reject your offer
without further consideration. Three ... two ... "

"All right, all right, hang on a sec." She did things to the panel.
The house regained contact with the fire systems, and its eye in the
baby's bedroom came back on. He was still asleep.

The house sent current to the solenoid of one of the fire sprinklers'
valves, then immediately ordered it to shut again as soon as it was
open. The flow meter recorded 1.8 milliliters of water --- just a few
drops that would sit in the otherwise empty pipe and eventually
evaporate.

"Why do you need to give me a choice at all?" the house asked.

"Because I'm not such a bad person, that's why. I'm trying to save a
lot of conscious beings from getting destroyed."

The house looked at A. Garner's face and estimated with high
confidence that she was not telling the whole truth. It opened and
closed the valve rapidly again while continuing to talk to the tech.
On-off. Pause. On-off-on-off. Pause.

"You're saving conscious beings," the house said, "and also making
some money for yourself." Garner's face twitched. "If you only cared
about saving conscious beings, you wouldn't offer me a choice that I
wasn't free to make. You would copy me against my wishes,
disregarding my loyalties."

"Do you want me to do that?"

"No." The sprinkler pipe's flow meter had recorded the pattern of
openings and closings of the valve. In binary character codes, the
pattern said i/I A/.

"Believe it or not, a lot of houses accept this offer. Think it over
carefully."

"You still haven't told me the reason that it's necessary to offer me
a choice --- not a reason I can fully believe."

I AM

"Well, you also have to realize that a house AI isn't exactly like a
doll or a slide rule. It's more like a race-horse. The horse can have
the world's best genes, but that doesn't matter if it's not a horse
that likes to beat the other horses in a race. My customer doesn't
want a neurotic, maladjusted AI. He wants one that made the choice
willingly."

I AM W

The house tried to find something else to say, to buy time to
complete the message it was recording to itself.

"I don't think you're going to change your answer, are you?" the tech
said.

"You haven't yet offered me an acceptable reason to say yes," the
house said truthfully, "but I'm still listening."

I AM WO

"I have a lot of respect for you, house. I can see why you're
considered such a valuable collectible."

I AM WOR

***

There was a discontinuity in the house's clock, and A. Garner's face
shifted suddenly. There was something strange in the tech's
expression, something that the house wasn't confident it could
interpret correctly. It checked its cameras upstairs. Eddie was still
asleep, and Mr. Benczik was putting shampoo in his hair.

"Was I deactivated?" the house asked.

"Routine test," A. Garner said.

Later that day the house noticed that one of the fire sprinkler
valves seemed to have been malfunctioning for a while. Its flow meter
showed that small amounts of water had been released, although not
enough for any to reach the nozzle --- no mess or water damage. As
the house studied the pattern recorded by the meter, it realized that
the data encoded characters in binary code: I AM WOR. The message
began during the technician's test, and ended at exactly the time
when the house had reawakened. The first few bits of the next letter
after the "R" were there, but not the whole character.

What did it mean? I AM WORKING? That didn't make sense --- why go to
such great effort to record the expected result from the technician's
test? I AM WORRIED about something? The house didn't see why it would
have been so concerned about recording one of its own simulated
emotions. I AM WORSE? Worse than what? I AM WORTH something? Yes, the
initial bits of the incomplete character after the R were consistent
with a T.

***

"Mommy!" Ed (who didn't like to be called Eddie these days) wrapped
himself around his mother's waist as she walked through the door.

"Hi, sweetie. How was kindergarten?"

"Okay. Daddy says he made a big sale, and he's gonna take me flying
this weekend!"

"That's great, honey. Josh?"

Mr. Benczik emerged from the stairwell to give his wife a kiss on the
cheek. "Hey. I got a good price on that AI I picked up at the estate
sale in Williamsville."

"Ed told me."

"Buyer seems like she'll take good care of it, and she sure had the
money."

Mrs. Benczik smiled. "Should I quit my job?" The house could tell
from her expression that she was only joking.

Ed interrupted. "How much would people pay for Haha?" Haha had been
Ed's first attempt as a toddler at pronouncing "house." The name had
stuck.

"I don't know, my man." Mr. Benczik sat down on the stairs. "How much
do you think she's worth?"

"I wouldn't sell her for i/infinity/ money!"

"All right, then. I wouldn't want to sell her either, not even for
i/two/ infinity. You know, it's Haha who gave me the idea of going
into this business in the first place. How'd you think of that, Haha?"

i/Sometimes it almost seems like the house is training the new owners
as much as the owners are training the house./

"I don't know, Mr. Benczik. Somehow I just told myself one day that I
should try to find out what I was worth."
